The coincidence of timing is both hapless and brutal. One moment, a few Old Etonian oiks set the mother of parliaments soiling her knickers, and much hysterical quavering about democracy under threat follows (Oh calamity! Suppose they'd been terrorists rather than Telegraph-reading toffs). And the next, here comes Ayad Allawi, prime minister of an Iraq that must somehow turn democratic by next January - but, for the interim, keeps seeing its people killed in their hundreds each week. Can our leaders and jittery backbenchers offer Allawi the homeland security he desperately needs? No: that's beyond the Tony Blair he met yesterday or the (allegedly) most powerful man in the world he will fly on to meet.  Sure enough, Messrs Blair and Bush can mouth the rolling phrases of welcome. "You are the very crucible of the fight against terrorism," according to Blair. Britain can send a few more troops to guard polling stations, if required, as well as pull them out on the quiet. America can swap rebuilding cash for security cash. But there is nothing they can do except make vague promises, grin and yack.  They can't stop the car bombs or the carnage among Allawi's fledgling police. They can't stop their own troops being killed as their own elections near. They can't stop the hostage-takers who so sicken western public opinion, and who then play on that revulsion with masterly malevolence. They can't keep the oil pipelines safe (or world prices under control).  They can, in fact, only mouth pieties as they clasp their chosen man's hand for the cameras and pretend that one fine day (just after America votes, since you ask) it will all come right. Bring our boys home. Revolutionise the Middle East. Lay al-Qaida waste. Heaven bless the miracle of the ballot box. But meanwhile, hear the chirrups from Peter Hain and friends: can we please have the Met and M15 to keep our shivering talking shop safe?  It is all, calmly considered, beyond pathetic. It exhorts bravery and sacrifice from those who have seen tens of thousands of their fellow citizens die in the past 12 months. It pretends that an election or two will bring magical peace and freedom. Yet there is no sign of that at a querulous Westminster, nor in the US, where the president travels with a security detail big enough to swamp Baghdad on a bad day.  Freedom, it seems, is to be won by the blood of others. Freedom is our single transferable gift to them, our shield against darkness. But meanwhile, Guantnamo Bay, and umpteen steely sonatas from John Ashcroft and David Blunkett, is our gift to ourselves.  Freedom, though, is also the freedom to ask awkward questions, to inquire of our masters: please, what happens next? And here the rhetoric fades to a mumble.  Allawi, good foot soldier that he is, declares that the insurgents are losing steam, that he's winning his own war for survival. Kofi Annan, good honest diplomat that he is, says that feels like wishful thinking and January elections look an impossible dream. Yet Blair and George Bush, twin towers of tautology, say nothing useful.  Our PM still talks of Iraq as a "stable democratic country" in waiting, but not of how it gets from A to B. The president of the United States, with 140,000 troops   on the ground who want to come home, talks about something else. His official campaign website (the one that swing voters can turn to) solves the problem by barely mentioning it.  "Fifty million people have been liberated from despotic, totalitarian regimes in Afghanistan and Iraq," it says. "The brutal regime of Saddam Hussein is gone, and an interim regime is leading the Iraqi people to freedom." And that's it, period. Re-elect Bush and Cheney and what do you get? A blank page.  Try Kerry and Edwards on the big issue, then? Forget that, too. Let's "plan Iraq's future by working with our allies", they say. Let's "launch a massive and accelerated training effort to build Iraqi security". Let's get our boys home by 2008, employing a plan too secret to describe in even vestigial detail.  But there's a terrible mis-match here. We ask the Iraqis to suffer and endure in a cause we hold dear, yet we tell neither them nor our own voters the truth. We hail democracy as some wonder ingredient, yet close the packet closer to home.  Ayad Allawi is a brave man; he wouldn't be where he is if he wasn't. Iraq, after Saddam, is full of brave men and women. But that same Iraq - its social infrastructure dismantled or destroyed - is desperately vulnerable. Why do the bombs keepgoing off? Because enough of society shields the bombers? How can so few dissidents cause such mayhem? Because there are actually rather a lot of them, because they are strong and Allawi is weak, already discredited in too   many eyes by the way that, perforce, he must lean on America? Those pictures with Bush this week will say two different things: to Americans, that an Iraqi leader is handling this crisis - and, to Iraqis, that Allawi is a Bush puppet.  It's a hopeless two-way stretch. It pretends the nightmare of Iraq is almost over, when it may just be beginning. It does not tell America's voters that this is the longest and bloodiest of hauls, with no release date and no exit strategy.  Democracy? Northern Ireland doesn't want it, again: too many sacrifices from too many politicians. (Wait till Moqtada al-Sadr sings that tune.) Westminster shuts its doors and rolls concrete blocks into place. Blair moves on, lest memos from the past pursue him. But let us, at least, be honest to our good, free selves. Here is a problem without a solution. And, inescapably in a democracy, it is our problem.