B>The following clarification was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and clarifications column, Wednesday September 15</B><BR><BR>In the column below we say that from the polls we can learn, among other things, that "Kerry is winning in the war on Iraq (50%-36%) but Bush wins on the war against terror (66%-25%)". The Zogby pollsters themselves say: "Kerry leads among those who say that their top issues are jobs and the economy (50%-39%), education (48%-37%), the war in Iraq (50%-36%), and healthcare (50%-34%). But, among those who say that the 'war on terrorism' is their top concern, Bush leads by 41 points (66%-25%). Right now all the talk is on the 'war on terrorism.' Kerry has to change the talk."<BR><BR><B><HR size="1"></HR></B><BR><BR>In a sense, of course, it's their election, not ours. To write about it is to risk damnation of the hellfire variety. "You disgusting, arrogant British piece of shit," emailed a certain Mr Rokhsar of optonline.com the last time I looked at Bush and Kerry. "No wonder we think all British are scum." That gentleman is not alone in his loathing (or, Tony Blair might reflect, his ingratitude). American exceptionalism slams doors in many faces. But this time, seriously, we have reason to keep knocking on those doors. This time we on the outside are one of the inside issues.  For the big Bush idea, earnestly repeated on stump after stump, is to make our world safer and happier by making it more democratic. One person, one grin. And those of us who've spent decades immersed in American politics can see much general, good-hearted sense in that. Democratic nations (at least until last year) tend not to go to war without good reason. Ordinary voting people, left to themselves, are the wisest arbiters we have. Relative freedom works better than autocracy or religious zealotry.  So take the president at his word. Let Iraq, Iran, Syria, Afghanistan and the rest import their ballot boxes and train their single transferable mullahs. Let's gently squeeze aside the leftover colonels, manipulative ayatollahs and corrupt monarchies. Farewell, Mubarak, Assad and (yes!) the House of Saud. Let's give democracy its chance. It may be a stance too interventionist, a panacea too pre-emptive, but at least the theory has benign resonance. Baghdad and Kabul, over the next few months, have great trails to blaze.  But then you hop from the high-minded general to the particulars of current campaigning - and canyons of incredulity begin to yawn. Is the other big issue whether, three-and-a-half decades ago, John Kerry inflicted a light flesh wound upon himself in order to win another Purple Heart and thereafter campaign against a war he'd volunteered to fight in? Or is it, rather, that George Bush, who supported that war, at least on paper, ducked out of serving (like his bellicose vice-president and Bill Clinton) and went strangely Awol in Alabama?  You can, and should, answer: neither of the above. Kerry was right to rail against the bloody, chastening ordeal of Vietnam - and is equally dotty to hymn its undoubted heroics now. What George did when he was on the sauce isn't remotely relevant to four more White House years. It was all a very long time ago. It doesn't matter a damn.  And yet, of course, it seems that it does. The tide has turned against the Democrats with startling suddenness over three short weeks. The pundits are already beginning to fold their tents and shrug. When the going gets rough, then a tough man called Karl Rove gets going: a smear a day keeps depression at bay.  Does that faze US politics junkies? Of course not. It is, on the contrary, part of the weird and wonderful allure of the American way. Even famously liberal Washington journalists, self- confessed voters for Kerry this time, say that the Bush boys fuel better copy and bigger headlines. They make an each-way bet and play a game that, for all its supposed portent, for all the usual stuff about defining moments, is still just that: a game; a savage war of words in which only egos and bank balances get wounded.  But what do they make of that in Najaf's markets? Do they see a shining city on the hill or a dirty old town sinking in the mud? What are they learning about mighty, exportable democracy in action?  There are indeed things to learn from the interstices of the current polls, from Gallup and Zogby and the Democrats' own samplings. That Kerry is winning on the war in Iraq (50%-36%) but Bush wins on the war against terror (66%-25%). That Bush would make America "stronger at home", but Kerry would "make it more respected in the world". That Kerry still edges ahead on health, education and the economy - Blair's own "real issues" - but that Bush's "decisiveness" increasingly leaves him trailing overall. That although a clear majority doesn't "like the direction the US is heading in" under the Republicans, it is still intent on going down that disliked path.  The sum of all this, for the moment, is profound incoherence, both internal and external. Are Iraq and the war on terror truly separate issues moving in separate directions? No resident of Baghdad, looking out of his back window, could suppose so. Doesn't strength in the world also automatically mean strength at home? Isn't a vibrant economy the essential of every success?  Kerry and Edwards, for what they're worth, are losing this contest - the "undecideds" splitting against them - because they haven't got their terrorism act together. Nobody seems to have read the 9/11 commission report and found that Bin Laden isn't Saddam. A "war" president issues orders, and voters - like most of the media - meekly follow him. Bin Laden in the shadows is George Bush's best recruiting sergeant when Dick Cheney plays fife and drum.  That's not a baleful verdict. So far, in a rather inert campaign, Kerry probably deserves to lose. So far, he hasn't staked out different ground clearly enough. So far, the snarls have it over the mumbles. But there is a wider imperative, growing insistently.  This, Bush says, is his last election. This is his last chance to show us how it's done. With soft-money ads and surrogate slurs and grotesque simplifications cooked in political hothouses? Is that the way? Is that what Cuba and Libya, not to mention the rest of us, have to look forward to? It isn't entirely arrogant to hope for something a bit less scummy than that.