The fattest factor in America's election year hasn't flamed, or even singed, yet. But another hot week of orange alerts, white knuckles and scarlet blushes begins to pose the inevitable awful problem. Who exactly will Osama bin Laden be voting for this November? Is he (whisper it gently) a closet Republican? Take almost any current terror scenario and put it to public opinion. Suppose that the 9/11 commission is right. Suppose that the obvious risk of another al-Qaeda attack turns to bloody reality sometime over the next four months. Who gains? Why, the sitting President, the Commander in Chief. George W Bush declared this 'war' and took his country into battle. It would not desert him if true crisis suddenly returned.  Suppose there are significant arrests which net more of Osama's operatives, perhaps even the thin man himself. Who gains? A no-brainer.  Or suppose that nothing much happens except the usual blinkings as orange lights return to green, that the dear old Wall Street homeland remains inviolate. Who gains? The Bush boys, though not yet the President himself, are already talking openly about a broken, defeated al-Qaeda, two-thirds of its leadership dead or behind bars. No news for them is the best sort of news. After all, their boss retains most of his approval ratings for handling terrorism. The numbers may be slipping, but they're positive - better than for the economy, far better than Iraq.  Anything that keeps in the public eye library pictures of masked Muslims training somewhere in the Hindu Kush, and so-called terrorism 'experts' peddling their TV wares, must be good politics for Bush. Come in Abu al-Hindi, this is your moment. Perhaps there wasn't much of a bounce for Kerry after Boston: the race is probably too frozen, too polarised for that. But the underlying figures in swing states are promising for Kerry and Edwards, their statistics for trust and recognition improving by 10 points or more.  So Tom Ridge's amazing discovery of hoary, non-activated plans to blow up some big banks certainly came in useful. Kerry was forced to squirm through his macho saluting act all over again, lantern jaw jutting from here to Vietnam. Not the most fruitful tack.  Like all presidential hopefuls, he wants to talk education, health and jobs - none of them a great Bush success story. The July unemployment figures are desperately disappointing for the administration. Kerry beats the President 53:43 there.  But Osama keeps dragging Kerry back and nothing, at root, can be decided until the weeks to election day pass without incident. And the memory of the Madrid train bombings casts a miserable shadow. Did al-Qaeda, last March, aim to overthrow Jos Mara Aznar's government and set Spanish forces scurrying home from Iraq? Subsequent trial evidence doesn't wholly confirm that. The effect of those bombings may never have been precisely calculated - or slotted into any rational scenario. Osama runs a diffuse agglomeration of an organisation, not the tight-knit hit squads of American imaginings.  Nevertheless, if al-Qaeda didn't realise that random carnage can equal precise political power before Madrid, it surely realises it now. Opportunity knocks in America this autumn, just as it will knock in Britain next spring. Knock-knock, who's there?  While Mr Bush, like Mr Blair, remains in charge, he has a practical advantage that can't be brushed aside. He is the C-in-C, the main man, the flag-waver supreme. Attack my country and you attack me - which (haplessly, narrowly, deplorably) redounds to my advantage.  Stumping round in the wake of Bush and Kerry last week, I was struck by how strained the President looks, and how thin his message sounds. Does the tale of a million jobs created bring crowds to their feet? No: especially after July, it shuffles into silence. Tax cuts? You've had them. Add in health and education spiels which might have been lifted entire from his 2000 election manifesto and the rest is tired rhetoric. 'Four more years, four more years...'  Bush's warm-up act, a toxic Texan country and western star, Larry Gatlin, sang what he might have called the  Ballad of Abu Graib - shout out that chorus: 'We are the good guys' - but the great leader doesn't even try to be as complicated as that. Between complexity ('flip-flop' in the Bush lexicon) and simple assertion, he picks assertion every time. Saddam was a bad man. The world is safer for his toppling. Other bad men are out there somewhere. He will confront them. God bless America, its veterans, honest folk and happy families; God rot trial lawyers, meddling judges and weapons of mass destruction. He deals with little local difficulties in downtown Najaf by ignoring them completely. What the President chooses to ignore doesn't exist. Four bore years 'moving America forward' (as opposed to down the drain).  It is not much of a pitch, and he seems to know it. There's an anxiety about his campaign you can cut with a Bowie knife. But plentiful cash and basic mantras may be enough if terror remains on the front-burner. War cries are potent for George. War brings out the worst in Kerry.  Back, then, to the imponderable Osama. Is he still alive? Is his network quite as ropey as the CIA would have us believe? Can he make his electoral mark, a November surprise? And how many voters salute when Howard Dean hints that the Wall Street scare was all got up by the President?  A slur too far. America's secret services are too demoralised and leaky to launch a neat conspiracy. They'd fracture when the heat came on. But that, in turn, doesn't mean that assorted agencies from Washington to London aren't working hectically to bring in every suspect or sleeper through the final stages of the election.  More activity, more arrests, more bloodcurdling claims, more headlines. The frenzy called  Fox News grows almost of its own volition. Timbers shiver by sheer habit.  Not all of this should be taken at face value, of course. George Tenet, when he was a revered director of the CIA last year (as opposed to this year's departed stumble bum), cheerfully admitted to Bob Woodward that the agency would make a big noise about tiny scraps of information because it made al-Qaeda think that they knew more than they did. Disinformation was the name of the essential gain - and still is. Feeding four pages of quivering detail to the  New York Times last week went far beyond reverence for a free press. Nothing is quite as it seems. The harder the claims, the frailer the handle on truth.  Is al-Qaeda quite as fearsome an adversary as both Bush and Kerry now paints it? Does it really take four years of supposedly 'intense surveillance' to mount a truck bombing in Newark, New Jersey? Whatever became of the grand old Duke of York?  The peril for Bush is too much continuing strife in Iraq, too many body bags - and too much empty hysteria about terror alerts at home. He could grossly mishandle it. Tom Ridge - anxious to quit at the end of the year to make some money - is a bumbler. Scepticism and cynicism will stalk him through the coming months. But Osama bin Laden, where is he?  The Clinton Democrats were sourer on Saudi Arabia than Bush, and Kerry makes jibes at the House of Saud which Osama so despises. You can see a malign logic in sitting this one out. But you can also see an empty stage and a curtain rising. It's an almost operatic challenge - and it beggars certainties till the last hanging chads drop.