Two different spots - both splattered with old, congealed blood - make the point. We still, almost unthinkingly, see American politics as a florid extension of our homegrown British variety. We still send our spin doctors to sit in the Boston (or New York) convention gallery and take notes, jotting ideas for future recycling. "Hope!" Is that a word T Blair might make something of? Could Howard do his Romanian roots spiel in the style of Teresa Heinz Kerry? But step far away from the gallery. One point of difference is there on the sixth floor of the Texas Book Depository in Dallas, a museum of murder, an archive of assassination. It's a crowded, successful enterprise. Stand near the clutter of book boxes in the corner, look out of the window towards Elm Street, and you can see almost what Lee Harvey Oswald saw down the sights of his $12 rifle 41 years ago.  And here, 300 or so miles east, is the second difference. Another museum, but more down-at-heel, three rooms in a clapboard building by a railway track. This is Winnfield, Louisiana, birthplace of Huey "Kingfish" Long, the mesmeric, corrupt, dynamic populist who ruled his state with utter ruthlessness, went on to the Senate - and died, like John Fitzgerald Kennedy, at an assassin's hand in 1935.  Theoretically the Winnfield museum belongs to generations of Louisiana politicians great and very small, their scrubby little artifacts stowed in glass cases, their roughly sketched faces ringing the walls; but, at heart, it exists because Long started his law practice 50 yards up the road in 1915 and put his home town on the map. There's a little stage over on the left side of the biggest room where an effigy of Long still stands, saturnine and a trifle hunched, declaiming as always. (Brother Earl, the governor who took a stripper called Blaze for his mistress, has a matching stage on the right.)  "Huey Long is the best stump speaker in America," the revered liberal columnist, Raymond Gram Swing, wrote in the Nation magazine in 1935. "He is the best radio speaker, better even than President Roosevelt. Give him time on the air and let him have a week to campaign in each state, and he can sweep the country. He is one of the most persuasive men living."  But soon thereafter he was dead. He had built bridges and roads and airports and universities. He had dragged Louisiana into the 20th century. He began his climb on the state rail commission, making the trains run on time. Yet he was also a brutal demagogue, malign and utterly controlling - "one of the most dangerous men in America," Roosevelt said. Why remember him now on his tiny stage when memory comes with a shiver of awe and disgust?  Dallas, in its own way, supplies some of the answer. Where were you the day Kennedy was killed? A 9/11 sort of question. It all comes hauntingly back on the sixth floor of the Texas Book Depository as the old videos run: the screams, the panic, the tears filling Walter Cronkite's eyes as he tells the nation. One film deals entirely with world reaction, the headlines of doom, the tributes. We felt, we all felt then, a sense of terrible loss.  But this sixth floor is more than a shrine. It is also somehow ghoulish, intrusive, a chamber of horrors as the crowds flood through and stare down towards the famous grassy knoll. Where's the plaque that marks the exact spot? This is curiously akin to the Memphis experience: touring Graceland to gawp at Elvis's golden discs and scarlet shagpile carpets, then pausing beside his grave in the memorial garden before heading back to the bus.  Dallas is showbusiness, just like Graceland. JFK and the King stand together on the same podium of reverence, exalted by the same tourist trade. And here, in Winnfield, the awful Long has his podium too. Do we Brits, we passing trade, possess anything like this now Diana's fountain is built and the coach traffic to her burial ground has dwindled?  No. Britain has its Westminster Abbey tombs - but we don't venerate our politicians, or even much remember them. Jimmy Carter talks tough on Iraq to the Boston convention, but would James Callaghan, Carter's contemporary, be allowed anywhere near a Labour party conference platform?  There is no Thatcher memorial library, nor will be. Churchill is mostly remembered in Fulton, Missouri. John Major is forgotten already. Huey Long lives on in Winnfield, Louisiana. Airey Neave's assassination passes without plaques or a wince of recognition. And that great white whale of a hotel on Brighton seafront might never have been bombed.  When you see this, clear-eyed, you also glimpse something that sets political America apart. America builds its leaders as superstars. Our politicians might like the star treatment, but   they're essentially bit-part players. Is John Kerry, rescued hamsters and Vietnam crews apart, truly that stupendous? No: he's a refreshingly ordinary, even mundane operator striving for the requisite charisma. He needs a legend implant. He has to be turned into top of the bill.  The system demands gods and oracles. It puts its chieftains on grotesque pedestals that they can bestride for life. Fail to win, of course, and you're Michael Dukakis, playing Boston tour guide last week. But winning equals a kind of immortality. Winning is its own demented glory.  Who said that he could never rest "because a few own everything and the masses own nothing"? It could have been Al Sharpton - or even Kerry - last week in Boston. But, of course, it was Huey Long, that good old, bad old boy, the master (as Gram Swing wrote) of a "grim, relentless, efficient vengeance" that still makes all the difference.