History and symmetry fit eerily together. Forty years ago, as Cyprus imploded, I arrived on the island for the first time, a callow Guardian reporter covering a world crisis. Almost simultaneously, the remnants of British control evaporated and the UN's blue berets - Indian generals and Finns and French-Canadians barely speaking English, let alone Greek or Turkish - arrived, too. They, in their permutating way, have stayed ever since, testifying yet again that peacekeeping is easier than peacemaking, that blue berets can turn into security blankets over inert time. But now they may be going home. Now the UN has a plan that all sides can glumly accept. Forty years on, perhaps we can hope.  Yet that is not, remotely, the symmetry's end. For what (or rather whom) do I remember from 40 years ago?  I remember a poky, narrow office in the Turkish area of Nicosia - really a converted shopfront with a porch - where Dr Kutchuk, the Turkish Cypriot leader, sat in the shop window talking inflexibilities wreathed in a cloud of cigarette smoke: a volcano waiting for some final cancerous explosion. I remember his number two, a podgy man in his late 30s, slipping deferentially back and forth at the rear of the shop, calling for coffee and packets of fags as required.  And, on the Greek Cypriot side, I remember the next best thing to the next best thing to Archbishop Makarios. A young lawyer - no more than 31 or 32 - who was in command when Makarios or the ex-RAF chap who deputised for him were out of town, as they often were. Then the legal eagle and man about town held after-hours court in a nightclub (with the best belly dancer I've seen). Then the late-night business of government was done, pretty efficiently, over gin and tonics or Keo brandy.  Where's the symmetry in that, you inquire? Easy. The chap at the back of the shop is Rauf Denktash, currently president of the largely unrecognised (except in Ankara) state of Turkish Cyprus. And the lawyer with an eye for a good belly dance is Tassos Papadopoulos, currently the elected president of Greek Cyprus (which we may also, in legal shorthand, call the Republic of Cyprus, scheduled to become a fully fledged member of the European Union in three months).   They are the main men now. Together, 40 years on, they have a chance of remaking a better world for their people, of ending the nightmare of fear and loss and struggle. But they have only a few short weeks left to do so. Otherwise, by mutual consent, Kofi Annan will try to do the job for them.  And the weight of history, of course, hangs heavy as lead. Forty years ago ... the time of Harold Wilson, Alec Douglas-Home, LBJ and General de Gaulle. They are long, long gone. But here are two survivors hanging on to their Mediterranean diet of power and fresh veg, leaders who were there at the beginning and are still there at the end.  What has moved them on? The expansion of a European Union grown beyond all prophesy over the intervening decades. Greek Cyprus wants the security of membership. Turkish Cyprus wants an end to the claustrophobia of isolation. Turkey wants to define itself for ever as a European nation. Never, for a second, underestimate the European Union's core role as a bringer and guarantor of peace.  But history exacts its penalties, too. Some elements of the Annan plan are bright and lateral. Keep 6,000 Turkish troops stationed in the north of the island until Turkey gets EU membership, at which point almost all outside forces go home. Yet too much of the plan, after that, is dusty old stuff pulled off a diplomatic shelf repeatedly over fruitless years of failed negotiation. A loose - very loose - federation of two largely autonomous areas? A balancing act for thousands of mainland Greek troops?  Annan says this is the only show in town, and he's right. But it's not a show you'd queue to see. It seems stuck, essentially, in an era before EU expansion, when foreign soldiers (and foreign intelligence agents) pulled the strings, when Americans and Brits and fascist Greeks bearing malevolencies created this fine mess in the first place. Can Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot genuinely not live side by side? They did for centuries, as a matter of fact. They do today, in London, from Camden Town to Camberwell.  The UN scheme puts too much of that nervously away. It pretends what too many Turkish Cypriots pretend to themselves: that the world hasn't changed. It probably encourages Greek and Turkish leaderships to posture and blame rather than cooperate. It declines to let Cyprus be Cyprus (partly because the British listening bases that Saddam couldn't reach in 45 minutes are supposedly too important to be abandoned). It is no more than a halfway house.  Will it, at last, be accepted? Probably, but not certainly; Mr Denktash loathes the EU and all its works. He jerry-built his little republic. This is the destruction of his life's work. Greek Cypriot voters, equally, may prefer to join Europe alone and let Ankara go hang. No referendum verdict, on either side, can be taken for granted.  But still, for all the doubts and all the sorrows, this is a moment to savour. It is not the best possible closure - but it is closure. It lets people who were friends and could be again sit together and work at their friendship. It unlocks a potential too long shut away. This, for 40 years now, has been my heartbreak isle, a symbol of man's imbecility to man. There's a symmetry as two young men grown old finally talk about putting it together again.