And is there humble pie still for tea? Tomorrow, after yet another primary pounding - this time in Wisconsin - Howard Dean will go home to Burlington, Vermont, and call the whole thing off. Staff contracts cancelled, campaign ads junked, hope filed away. Pass that pie right around the table. Another dash of gall with your wormwood, sir?It's a mere two months since Al Gore, the nearliest man who might have been president, staked what was left of his reputation and political future on endorsing Dean. No great gamble, maybe; at least not at the time. The former governor was almost out of sight then, king of fundraising, monarch of the polls. Al could read the writing on the wall.Nobody washed the wall down for weeks afterwards, either. Dean started January in a state of high-pundit sanctification. He was "unstoppable". The race for the Democratic nomination was deemed "over before it began". His Vermont insurgency, blogging brilliantly, had raised $40m; a no-hoper like John Kerry had stalled at $2m and was having to dip $6m into his wife's bottom drawer to keep going. Jimmy Carter borrowed Gore's welcome mat and rolled it out for Dean.This pie, you see, does not slip down easily. Its crust is charred on a bonfire of media vanities. So many experts - from statesmen to scribblers - got it wrong.  Nobody got it right. Why on earth should we suppose that the gang (currently wondering whether electability is quite Kerry's forte) are back on omniscient form now?And the answer, of course, is that we can't. The wonky fascination of American election  campaigns, decade after decade, is that you sit there in the stalls and gawp as your assumptions shred. Could the obscure Peanut from Georgia defeat President Gerald Ford? Not until he'd done it. Could the Cheesey Grin from Arkansas topple President Bush (mark one)? Or the anointed Gore lose his way?There are no certainties, no shoo-ins. America takes its liquor neat and its democracy raw. Naturally, the political cover story - at home and abroad - will be far more pious. Only policies count, routine dreams for improved education, health and the rest. Personalities and trivia are beneath contempt, if not quite beneath comment. But, in fact, so much is at stake that anything goes.Sniff when you find American papers and cable news stuffed with recondite records which, at best, show that President Bush (mark two) once had his teeth checked in Alabama - proof he was there and doing his National Guard duty (at least for 24 hours). Sniff again when Matt Drudge swills internet sex slime in Kerry's direction. Keep sniffing when the Bush-Cheney hitmen send out 6 million unsolicited emails titled "Unprincipled", detailing the Kerry count of special interests. What Dean on farm canvassing duty would call the "manure trench" is open  and ready for business.For the point about presidential elections - especially ones where a sitting president and his  entire edifice of patronage may get trashed overnight - is that they are desperate affairs. The campaign money is spent to defend big money just out of sight, off stage. Billions hang from a few loose chads. Blood must flow at the slightest scratch.Pundits taking a lofty view can always cancel and forget their last pronouncement. Kerry may go from hero to zero to hero and back again in a few weeks. Bush may still be the bet where the smart cash lies. But this is never quite the way it feels on the inside, behind closed White House doors.There, poll ratings in the upper 40s are as low as  they've ever been. There, the jobless figures stubbornly refuse to get better and the awful carnage of Iraq grows worse. There, perhaps, you can smell the panic. Did intelligence get it wrong on WMD? Do what you vowed not to do: set up an inquiry. Does anybody care about Bush's missing year in the National Guard? Do what you vowed not to do: release a mound of paperwork. Halliburton suddenly begins its own TV ad campaign, 30-second slots proclaiming: "We are serving our troops because of what we know, not who we know".And the lesson of Dean comes back to bite the Bush brigade. Forty million dollars couldn't do it for Dean. Cash was no help to him when the tide had turned. Why should cash - the mountains of it already piled high - be of any more use to the Republicans this year if they've worn out their welcome? Why should golden opinions from Fox News not turn to dross, just as the sheen was savagely wiped from Dean in a few crude clips? Where the devil is Osama bin Laden anyway - and is the choice of New York for a coronation convention as smart as it seemed when the hall was booked?Everything, in sum, is there to be fought over, bitterly, brutally. Fear not of winning, but of losing, begins to drive the debate. That which was impossible - say, making 8 million or more illegal  immigrants legal - becomes instantly possible. No available pork misses its allotted barrel. Randy Roustabout and his big brother, Chuck Cover-Up, start mailing Matt Drudge day and night.Is this, pray, the boon of freedom and probity we're determined to bestow on Baghdad? No wonder the Shia think they can do things better themselves. But this is the game we play, the game we espouse, the game we seek to export.And there is one last sadness as Dean departs. He leaves with over 600,000 registered campaign subscribers - believers, workers, recruits. Not so far off the number of Labour and Conservative party members combined. Perhaps cynicism got him in the end. Perhaps the game's afoot, all that matters. But humble pie is always on the  menu.