So, one year on, there is the last war and the last regime change to assess. Is Afghanistan now some briskly burnished Blairite vision of progress, the Switzerland of the Hindu Kush? Or does it haplessly wallow on in violence, tribalism and medieval poverty? And the answer, of course, is a bit of both. Women are back in school and in life. But the infrastructure is lousy. Mullah Omar and Osama bin Laden still have to rabbit away on that leaky old satellite phone of theirs. Even to tiptoe back 12 months, to the day the first cargoes of bombs were unloaded over Taliban front lines, is to undergo a jolting reality check. We promised so much in that first wave of concerted action and rhetorical aspiration: not just vengeance, but social revolution. Good on us, up to a point. Yet rhetoric butters precious few chapatis.  The most optimistic assessment is that the nest of terror lies smashed for ever, that Hamid Karzai (George W's dream of a house-trained Pashtun he could bring home to mother) will spend his dollars wisely over time - build roads, hospitals, football pitches and a recognisable version of democracy.  The most pessimistic view, bulwarked by too many assassination plots already, is that Karzai can't last for long - and won't the moment the White House ceases to care. He has neither the forces on the ground, nor the force of personality, to make his writ run. He is a noble accident waiting to happen.  Meanwhile, the terrorists are nesting again. They didn't go away. They merely read the writing on the side of the B-52s and skipped over the notional mountain borders in search of a safe haven.  Maybe they were inconvenienced for a while. Maybe some of them were burned or are locked away. But the fact that Omar (let alone Osama) is still out there, yacking, speaks volumes. When all the resources of the CIA and top special forces can't catch a one-eyed religious fanatic on the run, you ought to know you're in trouble.  And it is here, caught between a little progress and a lot of continuing trouble, that any 10/7/2002 (US-style) report needs to pause and look east. The temptation, the natural temptation, is to treat Afghanistan as not merely the main event, but the only event in that old, discarded war against terror. The trap that follows closes naturally.  Afghanistan is not, and never has been, some island of self-contained tranquillity. On the contrary, it lies prone and trampled across the gateway to Asia. It's a huge mistake to think of it as a normal state recovering from Russian invasion. It has always been a victim and a pawn.   T hat's why you have to look east and ask the hardest questions. Where did the Taliban and al-Qaida scoot off to once they realised that air cover and conventional victory went together? They vanished into Pakistan's stretching, intractable tribal areas (where Islamabad's writ has never run). Omar and Osama knew exactly how to pick up a new Sim card, available from every good street trader west of Peshawar. More seriously, those who fled found another war to keep them going.  You may not have followed the toll in and around Kashmir these past few weeks - 19 deaths here, 28 more there, temples stormed, politicians murdered as they run in particularly misbegotten elections. Kashmir is news in the west only when we choose to get alarmed about the nukes   bristling on both sides. What is it we call them elsewhere? Ah yes: weapons of mass destruction.  Well, prepare to bristle again. New Delhi and Islamabad have again tested their guided missiles in the last 48 hours. Call it Akash and Shaheen rattling. Their border crisis grows worse by the minute - and Pakistan's ability to stop the incursions, to cut off the terrorist links that sustain so much of the violence within the Vale, looks to be frail going on vestigial.  General Musharraf is stuck in the Arafat bind. He is blamed ceaselessly for laying a trail of terror. He makes speeches, gives assurances. But on the ground, nothing happens. The president with the braid is also the emperor without clothes.  And here, one year on, is the real tragedy. Afghanistan itself has merely endured another bout of invasion and supervision. Things are probably a little better and, with luck, may not get much worse. These latest invaders pave the roads they build with good intentions.  But the most recent invaders - those who seized minds and not fortresses - came from Pakistan. The Pakistani secret service has a patent claim on inventing the Taliban. Geography, blood and history bind the two lands together. Millions of Afghan refugees are part of Pakistani society. And where, pray, is the regime change there?  Before Osama struck, Musharraf was just another military dictator heading for an early bath. Before September 11, Pakistan had some realistic chance of returning to democracy and showing the generals (compare and contrast Turkey) that their time was up. You may forget such hopes now. Musharraf has had himself elected presi dent in a gambit even Florida would choke on. His general elections this autumn are the usual glum farce. What the Oval office preaches for Baghdad turns pear-shaped over Rawalpindi.  It's a terrible legacy. The strong man is weak. The ties that bind a society are loose and frayed. The extremists who kill Christians get away with it. There is no prospect of Kashmir peace, only of hair-raising Kashmir conflict. There is no tracking down of Omar and friends, because they are fighting among and with friends.  And this, remember, is a country of more than 150 million souls. This is a country with the talent to build a bomb of its own. This is a country that eats a billion dollars for breakfast. This, when it blows, will be the anniversary we always remember.