Pregnant pause. "And this," said the blonde from NBC, "underscores the importance of silence at a moment like this." She was talking about that internationally observed minute's worth of honour and sorrow - which might have been silent if only she'd shut up. But then, as a matching man from ABC observed, "a lot of people don't understand grieving on TV". Thus we begin to encounter what my American media friends are already calling "9/11 fatigue".  Was it - one year on - a great and often wonderful show? Of course. An honouring of the dead and a re-affirmation of faith which quite outshone the last such day built around Ground Zero (otherwise known as the six-months- on ceremony). George W's scriptwriters were at the top of their game. Pomp and circumstance joined in perfect fusion. We had absolutely no cause for complaint.  But that, surely, is that, isn't it? That's the end of the momentous affair. Some of the big US newspapers - the Boston Globe, the Philadelphia Inquirer, even the Wall Street Journal - saw the end arriving and, rather ahead of the Brits, adjusted accordingly. This time round, they didn't do a special supplement on the day. "Our approach is that less is more," said the Inquirer editor. "You reach a point when readers have seen enough."  Enough, enough. No more 24 hours of re-summoned emotion flooding across non-stop news channels. No more towering infernos recycled from library video. No more documentaries, definitive or otherwise, piled high. No more David Dimbleby, Jim Naughtie et al (130 of them from the BBC alone) doing their New York thing. No more newspaper tributes to weigh by the kilo. No more remembering?  It would - at least for a while - be heartening to think so: because September 11 is not that sort of date - and should not be that sort of anniversary. Where were you when it happened? There's a natural question, a prompt. But it's not a thesis; nor a handy peg for pundits (yes! ... guilty as charged) to hang their standard dissertations on. The day America lost its innocence ... the day the world changed for ever ... the day the 21st century began.  There were - make no mistake - many brilliant articles written for the occasion (by Simon Schama and Garry Wills among others). There are many brilliant photographs of the devastation on show over the road from the Guardian in our archive centre. Year one was a full dress occasion. But reheating these memories at 18 months, two-, three-, four- and five-year intervals? It will happen. The plans are being laid, the dates ringed. But it will be a terrible mistake.  The relatives of the victims - just like the parents of Soham or Dunblane - know that they have been in the thoughts of millions. That, I'm sure, has been some comfort. But there is no comfort in a continuously constructed carnival of bands and opera singers gathered without trace of the privacy grief needs.  Instead the messages - raw in their original horror - begin to silt with calculation. See how Mr Bush and Mr Rumsfeld (at the Pentagon and Ground Zero) first link terrorism almost elliptically with our old chum, weapons of mass destruction, and then tell the UN to brace up and free us from "terrorists and tyrants".  So it's all down to Saddam. So obliterating Saddam is somehow the payback for 9/11. So the weeping faces caught on camera, the prayers and the invocations, become a reason and a   justification for blasting Baghdad.  Welcome to Spin City. Do we care and bristle with unease? This is politics, after all, a web of manipulation so cleverly stitched that you can't easily see the joins. But when you do, the strands are soiled as they unravel.  And what are we remembering? An act of infamy, to be sure, but also failure of intelligence, a failure to heed clear warnings, which grows little better now as alleged middle-management "masterminds" are picked up after chatting "exclusively" to the Sunday Times.  Just to remind you. Last Tuesday, September 10, Washington was kitted out with live missiles and surface-to-air launchers. Two dozen US embassies were closed. Great bases were ordered to stand at the highest alert, Threat Condition Delta. Dick Cheney went to ground at "a secure, undisclosed location". London, like New York, bustled with precaution. "Information received" showed, apparently, that another attack was brewing.  But Osama bin Laden is slyer than the birthday boys. He doesn't strike to a media schedule. He lets the gallant vice-president, diving for cover, do his work for him. Want to be reminded that Osama (and Omar and most of the gang) are probably still at large and going about their grisly business? Need to have the continuing frailty of "intelligence" underscored? Anxious about a "war" against al-Qaida that is very far from won?  Then come to Ground Zero and the Pentagon, behind a ring of missile launchers and circling jet fighters and enough earth-bound men in uniform to conquer Afghanistan overnight, and see for yourself that Bin Laden's legend lives. Without lifting a finger, he can still set the mightiest nation hopping   in apprehension. They are reminding us that he's out there - and, just as bad, reminding us that the secret information they act upon, the info that hides the Veep, is wonky and flawed. As wonky, perhaps, as the stuff on Saddam's silos and bunkers the same sources supply?  There's nothing here to celebrate. There is only introversion, so that the deed itself becomes all-consuming and any perspective well nigh impossible. It was a horrible attack, an evil act. It needs avenging and rooting out. But when the president's scriptwriters, seeking to shame the UN, dig out Rwanda and Burundi, the deaths of thousands stretching into millions, they haplessly remind us of other failures and other grotesque evils. Sometimes we need to forget to remember; and sometimes we forget what we should remember.