We are a long way from Iraq; and, indeed, from any conflict zone bar the battle of the bulge. Skaneateles - say "Skinny Atlas" - is a tiny holiday town perched at the head of a long, thin Finger Lake in upstate New York. "A good place to be a kid in and a good place to retire to," says one 23-year-old who stayed, "but kind of boring for the 50 years in between." And yet, if you want to think about Baghdad, this is the spot. There's a little green park beside the water where America's calorifically challenged pause on their way to the ice-cream shop. If they heeded their great president, of course, they'd fight the flab that afflicts over 60% of them and take some vigorous exercise: like - as the thermometer tops 90F - a swim in one of the US's five cleanest lakes. But forget it.  The park has more awful warnings than it has trees. "Please don't feed the ducks - attracted by handouts, ducks tend to overpopulate this area, bringing a parasite which can cause swimmers a painful rash." Then there is all the standard stuff. No dogs, alcohol, picnics or litter. Swim in designated areas only between posted hours. That, though, is mere broad-brushery. The iron gate into three roped-off areas of lake (each barely more than the size of a squash court) gets a lot more specific.  No swimming allowed without lifeguards on duty (never before 1pm). Parents and guardians are encouraged to accompany children under 10 into the water. Enter through the gate only. Stay within the roped lines. Diving or flipping over is prohibited. Potential swimmers "may be asked to pass a test before going into deeper water". Properly sized US-approved life jackets "are permitted in the shallow zone only". Present yourself to a lifeguard "for inspection" before entering the water. Flotation devices such as masks and snorkels not allowed. Don't swim under the rafts or lifeguard stations. No running or horseplay. No eating, drinking or smoking in swimming areas. And it costs you $3 a time.  Not surprisingly, despite the heat of the afternoon, only two kids and an extremely senior lady have attempted this obstacle course. Three bored lifeguards - college students working their way - sit on the steps by the gate. A fourth - a blonde girl with calorific challenges of her own - watches glumly from a raised seat at the end of court number two. Court three, the one where you can't touch the bottom, is mysteriously closed until next week.  The man who runs the post office boat, chugging round the lake every delivery morning, points out a meadow by the country club and a small strand running along the waterside. "The farmers used to let folks swim there once," he says, "but the insurance got too expensive and they had to stop it." Just so.  That which harms you may be the subject of a small-print message from the surgeon-general. That which might actually do you some good - freely chosen in the land of the free - has shrivelled with constant litigation, another victim of the legal tribes hunting wins and fees in the woods where once only Iroquois roamed.  Is that sensible? You may make a case in the wake of some swimming tragedy (the same case, essentially, which bans mums with two children to watch from using Peckham's wonderful new baths when I get home). You may plead the general daffiness of American notices in   mitigation. (The one in my room at the last hotel said: "Please unlock door before going outside on your deck.") But it's still rather sad. So much clean, cool water - 34 miles on a round trip - and so little chance of getting your feet wet.  That, however, isn't quite the whole of the park; for, carefully tended down to the right, there's a war memorial, two plaques facing each other across a sculpted space of silence. One remembers the boys from Skaneateles who fought in the "great war". Count: there were 200 of them. The other remembers the fighters against Germans and Japanese. Count 541 of them.  How, in the brooding summer of 2002, do you put this park - this mixed patch of duty and officiousness, of courage and bureaucratic quavering - together and make sense of the whole? To the left, the only risk you're allowed to take is stuffing your face with a chocolate fudge ice; here, between plaques, are hundreds of men, ordinary guys from the farms around, who took the risks that twice pulled our European fat out of the fire. Post a fresh notice. "Scoffing and sniggering prohibited." The sacrifice and the history are too formidable. But struggle, nevertheless, over the reconcilings.  George W and Donald, his avuncular zealot, are beating the drums for another war. They haven't said quite why yet. They've only just begun to add Saddam to their al-Qaida stopping list. The evidence, such as it is, remains buried beneath chat about "weapons of mass destruction" that the beast of Baghdad might one day direct against Israel   (which already has such weapons anyway). Whatever became of deterrence theory?  But if they do ever prove their case, if there is real and present danger, then there will be a call of duty - and we may reckon that more boys from around the lake will volunteer to do it. Meanwhile, though, America - including the Pentagon - is reading the signs on the left. No attacking without due evidence. No sacrificing without good cause. No needless slaughter, political entanglements or risky missions allowed. All secret plans to be leaked to the New York Times in triplicate. All blood-curdling rhetoric to be accompanied by certificates from the surgeon-general.  This "invasion", on current form, will soon encounter derision beyond any lifeguarding. It is no way to prepare for or win a war. It will sink where we cannot swim.