There are two ways of running a country. One is a democratic way. The other was wondrously encapsulated a few days ago by a distinguished international exponent. "I do not believe in power sharing ... I believe in unity of command. There has to be only one authority for good government." Now, who said that? Tony Blair? Ariel Sharon? The last president of Venezuela but three? No: this is a tricky question, not a trick question. But it is a question that ought to be haunting the chancelleries of the west. General Pervez Musharraf has summoned Pakistanis to a wholly spurious referendum on April 30 so that they may vote to keep him as head of state, head of the army and head of anything meaningful for the next five years.  His political opponents are calling for boycotts, but their rallies are banned, their supporters bullied. The press is getting its usual legal drubbing. The military heat is on. So, George, Tony: which way are we voting? It's time to choose. Do we care about freedom, or the war on terror?  Terror has been good for Musharraf. Twelve months ago, rather earlier than most Pakistani military dictators, he had survival problems. The economy was down. He'd been chucked out of the Commonwealth, international aid had shrivelled. Nobody around the "international community" table liked his nuclear bomb. Nobody was very keen, either, on his Kashmir incursions. The end of the cold war had made India more important to Washington than Islamabad. From inside and out, he was prodded towards promising local and national   parliamentary elections (and pencilled them in reluctantly for October).  What a difference September 11 made. Musharraf was suddenly the White House's best beloved. He cleared his airfields and offered his supply chains. Pakistan emerged as a bastion in the sacred struggle against the Taliban (which its secret military intelligence had done so much to create and foster). Musharraf was courted. The money taps were turned back on. Various grave pledges about the need for a Kashmir solution were uttered. But he couldn't cancel the elections.  The referendum is his insurance policy. Now he has to legitimise his standing just in case the autumn polls turn against him and produce some awkward and truly elected representatives. And there are plenty of realpolitik reasons why No 10 and the Oval Office might wish to see him wriggle through.  The war against terror isn't over. It shows signs of rumbling far into the future. More British troops are piling into Afghanistan. American planes dispense friendly and unfriendly fire. Osama bin Laden's video library, at least, is still open for business.  Pakistani air bases are needed as much as ever. Pakistani troops have to seal the borders and join with the Brits and Americans in hunting down terrorists. Pakistani stability is pretty vital: so, apparently, is the general's calm pragmatism. He's neither a fool nor, necessarily, a rogue. He is certainly a safer bet than any national electoral outcome would throw up. It would be nice, if you were secretary of state or Jack Straw, not to have to choose.   The trouble is that choice here isn't some optional extra. This choice is about the future of Pakistan, and perhaps much else. Democracy, apparently, is important to the west in assessing the aftermath of Jenin. Democracy is important in condemning Saddam Hussein. We're asked to shiver over the axis of evil because it knows nothing of freedom. Our dearest wish, apparently, is to see Afghan elections that will set that wretched nation on the road to recovery.  A benign, democratic Afghanistan huddled alongside a giant Pakistan where the men in braid still rule? It doesn't make sense. Nor does it even have the apparent virtue of practicality: for Musharraf, in spite of the billions coming in, is weak. Since he announced his referendum gambit, he's opened his prison gates and let out more than a thousand of the religious extremists he rounded up last October. He's canned his soft line on Kashmir and upped the rhetoric count. He has even talked about the extremis of using his nuclear bomb. This is an operator bent on surviving because the years since the 1999 coup have given him no measured path to retirement and created no democratic infrastructure capable of giving Pakistan the stability it needs.  Seven months into this "war", it is time to get priorities sorted. Will a democratic Afghanistan wedged between Pakistan and Iran survive? Don't give the proposition house room. Will endless infusions of Royal Marine commandos flush al-Qaida out? Not while the Osama residuals can waft across a border that Musharraf and his army are too feeble to close. Will the defeat of the Taliban signal wider defeat for Islamic zealotry? Not if that same extremism is gaining ever greater sway in Pakistan because the generals need it to keep the forces of secular modernisation (and democracy) at bay.  Armies, perhaps, require what Musharraf calls "a unity of command". But the bloated Pakistan army isn't the answer to any of Pakistan's most urgent questions. Musharraf is our short-term friend and long-term enemy.  <A