There are some things Colin Powell can't say on his struggling mission, some scripts George Bush can't afford to read, some truths Tony Blair cannot stir into his familiar stew of pieties. Here are a few of them. Take, to begin with, a country a few hundred miles from Jerusalem. Twenty-eight years ago, one of the world's most powerful armies came to call. It blasted a pathetic defensive militia to smithereens, drove tens of thousands of innocent civilians into refugee camps, raised two fingers to a bleating "international community" and took what it wished. America, utterly implicated, looked the other way. We saw a country - a beautiful country - divided.  Today the invader still sits where it sat all those decades ago. The dispossessed of yesteryear remain dispossessed; settlers from abroad have been imported to live in their old houses and till their old fields, walls of exclusion ruthlessly built. And apart from occasional yakking - by UN diplomats or State Department "special coordinators" - nothing happens. The fruits of force hang heavy on the bow.  That is, to be sure, an over-simplistic rendition of the continuing Cyprus crisis. It doesn't give full weight to the fear and oppression Greek Cypriot militias once inflicted on the Turkish Cypriots. It fails, perhaps, to invest full hope in the latest rounds of "intensive negotiation" between Glafcos Clerides and Rauf Denktash, which thus far have yielded a low-intensity boredom. It doesn't factor in the pressures on Ankara that may or may not flow from Nicosia's impending membership of the European Union.  But there is still that brutal truth. Without military threat, without what we would currently call "terrorism", the Greek Cypriots have made no progress at all in reclaiming their homes or property through almost three decades of striving. International law is on their side. International opinion does not recognise Mr Denktash and his "independent state", with thousands of Turkish troops camped in its back garden.  Words, words, words. The diplomatic wordsmiths, on current form, may toil forever; but they will never spin out a solution unless they can find a pressure point, a weapon which can't be ignored. In the 1950s, the terrorism of Eoka gave Cypriots their freedom from Britain. Flatulent pledges and UN resolutions have not given them justice since.  So to the aftermath of Ramallah and Jenin, to Colin Powell and - just possibly - the prospect of a ceasefire. Yasser Arafat bargains in his shattered bunker. Constructive bromides ensue. But "peace" here has no value unless it leads inescapably to a solution which involves the dismantling of Israeli settlements on the West Bank and the return of the occupied territories to a viable Palestinian state protected against instant invasion.  Will that happen? Nothing Ariel Sharon's spokesmen say gives any such hope. The "negotiating table" may be routinely hymned, but there's nothing worthwhile on its menu. Sharon has always put the settlers first. Ehud Barak, for all his zeal, failed to produce an offer which Arafat could sell to his people. The massive demonstrations of the intifada followed naturally. Israel hasn't yet confronted the totality of the concessions it will have to make. Jaw-jaw is not an alternative to war-war, merely its precursor. Only formidable outside pressure can alter the equation and impose the Saudi plan.  But pressure from where? The second sad truth is that America has destroyed its own credibility. George Bush wanted Israeli withdrawal "now, without delay". Instead, he got Jenin. We talk of Britain's special relationship with Washington; but, alas, it fades into insignificance besides Israel's current grip on the American body politic. Here's the real 51st state, embraced by Republicans and Democrats alike, rendered untouchable by the loose thinking and sloppy phrasing of the "war against terror".  It is instructive, these days, to follow events through the eyes of America's 24-hour TV news channels, where tales about Iran's supply of arms to the Palestinians or Arafat's funding of suicide bombers are immediately recycled as proven fact on the say-so of a source called "Israeli intelligence". The CIA and Mossad are two peas in this information pod. And when a bombing comes, as it came to Jerusalem's market last week, the cameras and the ritual denunciations of terror flow automatically because we can see what has been done. One of Mr Sharon's spin doctors was even on hand to contrast American staunchness after September 11 with Europe's feebleness - the same weakness, apparently, which let fascism grow 70 years ago.  But nobody can see inside the wreckage of Jenin. Nobody serves up pat homilies from there on America's breakfast TV. Nobody has access to the unseen "justice" dispensed by the Israeli Defence Force.  The third bitter truth, then, is that there will be no consistent pressure on Tel Aviv, that the negotiating table is bare. So we're back to defining terror.  Terror made Makarios president of Cyprus and Kenyatta president of Kenya. The terror of the Stern gang was there at the birth of Israel. Terror sits behind ministerial desks in Belfast and lurks in the ante-chambers of Islamabad. This terror is not uniquely evil. Terror is a known and tacitly accepted means to a regional or national end.  That doesn't make it anything but vile. The bomb in the Jersusalem market, triggered by yet another girl with sad eyes, was vile. So is what is happening in Bethlehem and what has happened in Jenin. So is the death toll of the intifada (which, of course, yet remains far heavier on the Palestinian side).  But the question we all have to answer when the shooting stops is what kind of alternative we can provide? Will it be Cyprus squared, more decades of yak in search of a pressure point? Will it be the inert failure to broker a Kashmir peace as real weapons of mass destruction gather on both sides? Do we just seek a Middle East ceasefire as some staging post on the road to Baghdad?  The best answers, of course, have little to do with us. They come from a Rabin or a Mandela, from statesmen who know what must be done. But Sharon and Arafat don't belong in that basket. They are both elected and both unworthy. They are part of the problem and not the solution. So if there is to be a solution, it must come from elsewhere. And the bitterest truth of all is that our world community, spinning its words and its pieties, has little to offer.  The terror of Jerusalem and Jenin - one delivered by a girl in a robe, the other by men in uniform - is our terror. Take it away and we would do nothing, as we have done nothing before. A crisis turned to peaceful resignation is no crisis at all. And talking shops have no answers on sale.