Caging Arafat beneath the wreckage of his compound, says Ariel Sharon, is stage one in a "long and complicated war which knows no borders". War. That wretched, mystifying word again. Is this the "war" against terror declared last September 11? Is it the "all-out war" that the best troops in the Middle East are always on the brink of unleashing against Arafat's rag-tag militia? Will tanks roll into Syria or Israeli missiles rain on Tehran? Will the casualties and the dead get their full Geneva Convention rights - or be stuck in some hole in Guantanamo Bay? Grit your teeth and define your terms. War - before the lawyers start their yacking - is war. You know it as the debris falls around you. We fought a war against the IRA for 20 years. Maybe we didn't call it that, but the end results were identical. People by the hundred shot or blown up: then, eventually, peace. In just the same way, Arafat and Sharon have long waged undeclared war. Hundreds more die. The Israelis use their heavy-duty kit to blast the remnants of PLO authority. The Palestinians wrap teenage girls in Semtex and send them, smiling sweetly, to devastate supermarkets and cafes.  Are they - the inexhaustible legions of Hamas and Hizbullah - to be condemned for that? It is easy to feel revulsion at so many young lives lost in a cause we can't fully understand; and over so many Israeli civilian lives, innocent lives, brutally shattered. This isn't how it should be... Kids enfolded in explosive, human bombs, don't feature in any of Jane's catalogues. We shudder and shrink from the reality.  Yet there is also another reality. The IDF has its jets and tanks, weapons of conventional war built and used to kill. The Palestinians possess no such weaponry; they are completely outgunned and outclassed. No one - apart from Arabs bearing wan words - comes to their aid. But they have, nevertheless, found a weapon at last that the Israelis cannot counter.  Suicide is their chosen tool, their howitzer of ultimate resort, clinically chosen. We may think of suicide as an act of emotion - but, as Primo Levi once said, that overlooks its careful sentience. "Animals don't commit suicide." And we need to be clear: it's a winner. It has humiliated one of the world's toughest conventional armies. They move in, flattening all before them and, far away, another burger bar or shopping centre is blasted to smithereens. There are some wars conventional soldiers can't win.  Not all peace processes come to dust. Enter, like the Easter media bunny, our Northern Ireland secretary, making cautious comparisons with Ramallah - and, four years after the Good Friday agreement, drawing cautiously optimistic conclusions. Fair enough. There's tolerable news from Belfast for a government which needs every scrap of cheer it can get. But some themes are bigger than soundbites. The moment you really begin to dig - to put Belfast and   Bethlehem together - is the moment a pit of despair opens beneath your feet.  What's happened in Northern Ireland, gradually through the last six or seven years, is a tacit admission on all sides that here's a war no one can win. Not the Provos, not the loyalists, not the British army. A bloody, costly, futile no-score draw. Jaw-jaw, then, has to be better than that. But there is, as yet, no such admission from Tel Aviv and the bunkers of Gaza. There is still a faith in victory.  We ought to be more reflective about such beliefs now. Northern Ireland (though we never talked of it in those terms) was a war that all the parachute regiments and special forces at our command couldn't win. Why? Because "we never let them off the leash"? No: because they couldn't, in those asinine terms, be let off the leash. Their barricades criss-crossed community lines. They fought in the only way they could.  And so, time and again, it goes. Could the might of the French army, 45 years ago, quell Algeria? No: the swilling carnage on the streets, the killings mounting to a frenzy of one every 10 minutes, went far beyond conventional riposte. The history of the 20th century is littered with wars - civil wars, liberation wars, guerrilla wars as well as those from the new terrorist lexicon - which live on only in ignominy or retreat.  The standard wisdom is that Israel needs, somehow, to be settled before America moves on to its next great task - and Iraq. The "most powerful nation on earth" chafes in evident frustration. It has the technology to drop on Saddam from a great height: the difficulty, though, is this bloody sideshow which fractures the coalition and leaves even trusties like Tony Blair looking exposed.  Bit by bit, the original Bush wisdom disappears. The White House has to try to intervene, to twist in impotence or cancel its last announcement by siding with the UN majority against Sharon: messy infirmity. Foreign politics and domestic politics blend into each other. The war against terror waits for General Zinni - and General Zinni may have to wait for ever.  What's gone wrong? The negotiating muscle, on examination, turns out to be flab. The weaponry the Pentagon heaps on Israel cannot be brought to bear. The suicide bombs go on and on.  And it is crass not to learn the wider lesson of desperation. While there are kids who will put on their Semtex coats, there is and can be no peace. This is the low-tech world's solution to hi-tech: sickening, but sickeningly effective. Only the legal jargon of war, the supposed rules of gentlemanly conduct, stops us realising as much. George W may be adding missile shields to his arsenal, but their wonder rests on conventionally countering the most conventional threat: heavy missiles homing in. Why on earth suppose that your enemy will play the game that way? Security disasters through the years - from Vietnam to Osama's penknife hijackings - counsel otherwise.  Writing in this vein, of course, invites the usual pile of emails from America berating European cowardice and (worse) liberal hand-wringing. Not so. The world would be well rid of Saddam. He's a serial killer. I have no qualms about British troops roaming Afghanistan's ravines in pursuit of al-Qaida. This debate isn't about ends, but means.  Margaret Thatcher couldn't solve or subdue the simmering Irish. De Gaulle couldn't worst the Algerians or his own blood-soaked rebels. Sharon is making absolutely no headway along the same path. American power drifts inertly, incapable of bringing a resolution.  There's a message here for us, and for Blair and Bush. Some wars aren't there for the winning. Some peaces can only be brokered in extreme exhaustion. Special forces are only as special as the intelligence of their leaders. Israel isn't the sideshow here. Israel is the main event. If they can't settle that, then they can settle nothing.