The prime minister of India warned that, unless Pakistan reined in its Kashmir guerrillas, there'd be war. The president of Pakistan solicited the "good offices" of the US - and sent in his guerrillas anyway. Bloody miscalculation, bloody incompetence all round. But that was 1965, number two out of four conflicts that have wracked the subcontinent since independence. And here (quite possibly) we go again. Accidents - bloody accidents - keep happening. Forget the end of history, forget the blah-blah of hope as the year turns: forget especially any sheeny triumphalism attached to the "war" against terrorism. New Delhi and Islamabad seem to have learnt nothing and forgotten nothing. They are locked in the time warp of half a century ago. Only the nuclear warheads in their arsenals are new.  Kashmir, perhaps even more than the Middle East, is the world's most intractable, most punishingly futile crisis. Decade after decade it rumbles insolubly on, claiming dead on the battlefield but, beyond that, claiming millions of lives lost to poverty and sickness, people ground down by an obscene weight of military spending. The generals and politicians who made the first blunders have long since passed away: though the excuses have changed, their heirs perform as though from memory.  Remember Sir Hari Singh, the playboy maharajah of (Hindu) Jammu and (Muslim) Kashmir, who paid £50,000 for an imported dancing girl and flip-flopped his misbegotten statelet into Delhi's embrace at the last moment of independence. Remember the referendum India promised and then forgot. Remember the endless intrigues that went with the cold war. Remember Nehru's belief in the "basic ideal" of secularism that could not be compromised.  All this is gone now. Messrs Putin and Bush are best buddies. China is coming in from the cold. A Hindu nationalist prime minister rules India. What's left is one glorious valley where no tourists tread and a desolate, impoverished slab of rock and ice sustained only by stubbornness. Kashmir's sole remaining importance is as a casus belli.  Benign diplomats, left to themselves, would have no difficulty. Set Kashmir in the context of a wider Indo-Pakistani settlement, open borders to trade and travel, even create a subcontinental common market. Offer Kashmir itself (but not lowland Jammu) a measure of independence like Andorra or the Channel Islands: neutral, semi-autonomous, free to grow rich on American Express cards. Hold your plebiscites and proclaim a victory for pragmatism. Everyone wins.  But that is not the way of this world. Pakistan, through 50 years of governmental failure, has turned the "liberation" of an Indian Kashmir (which would probably recoil from Islamabad's embrace) into a symbol of struggle that keeps its swollen army - and successive military dictators - in place. Kashmir, at least in the rhetoric, is one definition of nationhood. And India, having spent so much blood and blood money, responds in kind. If Kashmir goes, who can say what other fractious state may wish to follow?  Those are mountains of fear, self-interest and pride left to climb. They are also mountains of unreality.  What does Mr Vajpayee hope for if his troops move over the Pakistan border? Probably (because of superior manpower and equipment) a short, conventional campaign in the flatlands of Punjab and Sind that makes General Musharraf sue for peace and then topples him. But it's hard, in the miserable pantheon of history, to see how this helps. It will be killing business as usual in the hills again all too soon. And the parallels with Sharon and Arafat also operate. India assumes, as Israel assumes, that Musharraf can turn off terrorism like a tap. It ain't necessarily so.  Where, since you ask, is Osama bin Laden? Maybe somewhere in Pakistan. General Musharraf would love to round him up and hand him over - but he's an Arafat, the temporising victim, not the master, of events. His writ barely runs through the tribal areas. He doesn't know whether his notoriously flaky secret service, the ISI, is for him or against him. Can he click his fingers at Azad Kashmir as Taliban remnants trek in? Did he welcome the suicide attack on India's parliament, which sparked off this round? Of course not. But has he the physical and political clout to track down the perpetrators, close down their networks and seem Vajpayee's patsy? No: he's stuck, betwixt and between.  Kashmir, in sum, isn't separate from the "war" against terrorism. It has swiftly become an umbilical part of it. Terrorist groups like Jaish-e-Mohammed have seen the chance of a fruitful mayhem. India has upped the ante in the shadow of Sharon. Musharraf, having risked so much to side with the White House coalition, finds himself dependent on an army loyalty which could be withdrawn if he goes soft on his nationhood symbolism. More bloody miscalculation, more bloody incompetence.  Yet, for once, there is a difference. The difference we call September 11. This, in the second phase, is "our war" between members of our coalition. This is "our" Pakistani dictator, suitably pavilioned in praise, cash and assurances. These are "our" nuclear weapons on both sides, sanctions withdrawn. These are "our" arguments for action or inaction, suitably reprocessed. This, when and if the tanks roll around Sialkot, will be our nightmare.  George W, miffed that the net around Osama is suddenly full of holes, may not welcome such a show. America's war doesn't include trading old flashpoints for new. But we ought to be grimly clear. Fifty years on, the mess that we Brits left behind returns to haunt us all. And this time, with this coalition, we need to sort it. We've started: we have to find a finish.