There's that word again. Cowardly - as in "these despicable and cowardly actions must be brought to an end". This particular bit of rent-a-response flowed predictably from Colin Powell after the bombs in Ben Yehuda street had taken too many young Israeli lives and ruined dozens more - though he could, of course, have been talking about the twin towers again. Terrorism, in his pat definition, is always cowardly. Alas: it isn't so. The two young Palestinians who brought such horror to west Jerusalem on Saturday night, or the others who died in the debris of buses across the country yesterday, are like the 19 young Arabs who staged September 11: dead by their own hands, blown to pieces with their victims. You may heap any combination of adjectives on them you like. But leave "cowardly" out of the equation. Desperation carries its own lexicon.  Whichever way our generals in this "war" against terrorism twist and turn, we keep coming back to the Middle East, to Israel and the embryo state that might be Palestine. Not because it leads us straight to Osama bin Laden - but because, in too many ways, it doesn't. Bin Laden merely adds the Palestinian cause to his bizarre agenda as a political afterthought. The carnage across Israel yesterday - like the tit-for-tat carnage that follows it - is more central than that. It backs us against the Wailing Wall. It demands to know what we mean by "terror".  Afghanistan, a designated war zone, operates to conventional rules. Armies mass around Kandahar. Commando squads scour mountain caves. Civilians endure collateral damage. It matters - in Belgrano mode - whether the Northern Alliance have copies of the Geneva convention in their knapsacks. And already a movable circus of negotiators troops between Bonn and Kabul, trying to agree the forms of words that go with peace settlements. There is, in short, the appearance of a familiar, comforting structure to events. Here is a war with victories and defeats easily recognised - and supposed final triumph only one brass band short of a load.  Where does George Bush go from here? Anywhere that a fleet of B-52s will carry him. On to Somalia and Sudan for a while, perhaps - faraway places of which his public opinion knows nothing. But then, all too clearly, Saddam Hussein will be centre stage. Unfinished business. The fragments of Iraqi opposition are mustered for orchestration as some kind of united front. George talks menacingly about the "consequences" for Saddam.  One size fits all. If Afghanistan, with a lot of help from surrogates on the ground, can be given some veneer of governmental normality, then the same formula can be used on Iraq. Donald Rumsfeld pencils in Turkey on his latest shuttle schedule, leaving London (and an anxious Tony Blair) off the list. Fresh back from Washington, Ian Duncan-Smith clears his throat and croaks gung-ho approval.   Nobody talks about Ben Yehuda Street. Nobody makes the connection. Yet it really couldn't be clearer. Very soon now, despite last night's frantic efforts at avoidance, the Israeli army and air force will be back exacting retribution as usual. They will move into Palestinian villages and towns, zap police stations and Palestinian Authority buildings, rocket homes that may - or may not - house terrorist leaders. They will go on denouncing Yasser Arafat as the fount and symbol of all evil and punish him for his failure to clean up his Gaza and West Bank act - and this time they have Messrs Powell and Bush on board. The president wants Arafat "immediately to find and arrest those responsible for these hideous crimes". Expect no more Yasser-and-Tony Downing Street photo-opportunities for the moment. Expect the latest vague American effort at mediation to founder in hopelessness.  No one can quite afford to tell the truth - that it is weakness, not strength, that drives on the killing. That Arafat, though he would dearly like to contrive a halt, is too weak fully to control the forces of desperation within his territories. That Sharon is too weak (and too blinkered) to make the political concessions that might at last start to bring closer that Likud chimera, "peace with security". And that America is weak as well - as weak as Colin Powell's last big policy speech, long on sympathy for "Palestinian frustration", pitifully short on specific pressure to relieve such boiling anger.  A connection - and a dislocation. Where does this war on terrorism truly go next? Does it begin and end with a few designated "terrorist states" that can be bombed into submission? Or does it include those countless other groups (some state-sponsored, some alone) who use murder as the tool of their ambition? The Tamils, the Azad Kashmiris, the Corsicans, the Basques, the Real IRA?  Thus far, a few passing words apart, this has been the al-Qaida show. International terrorism, apparently, is one thing: nationalist terror rather another. But Israel and the Palestinian Authority close that gap, the hinge of dislocation.  Suicide bombers in Jerusalem or Haifa who owe nothing to Bin Laden can wreak their havoc and remain on one side of the line - because, in a week or two, Washington and Brussels will be pleading with Sharon to move his tanks out of whichever chunk of Palestinian land they've parked on. Identical lads doing exactly the same thing on Fifth Avenue would be treated entirely differently, rewarded for their pains with a B-52 over Baghdad. Degrees of desperation? It doesn't make sense.   Two agendas have emerged in the days since September 11. The White House agenda - no matter for praise or blame - wants no great responsibility for the Afghanistan it will leave behind. It wants to root out the bad guys and leave a sackful of dollars behind for the slightly better guys. It wants to move on. If the good guys go bad, it can always bomb them again.  The European agenda, by contrast, cares - or seems to care - just as much about ends as it does about means. It wants to replace what was bad with something more permanently good, more tended and succoured from outside. It worries about the "after" as well as the "before". It looks at the daunting problem of a benignly democratic Iraq and shivers with apprehension.  Ben Yehuda Street is a wake-up call for both sides of that divide. Does "democracy" guarantee peace? No: the intractabilities of democracy brought Israel a prime minister called Sharon. Can heavy artillery win the day? No: heavy artillery is part of the problem, not the solution. Does the west have enough clout - and resolution - to impose a settlement? No: it merely mixes passionate adjectives with irresolution. Is there any prospect, apart from the lull of exhaustion, of draining the blood from this bath? Dream on. The nightmare of Israel gives us a glimpse of other nightmares of desperation in waiting. And it is cowardly to pretend otherwise.