That blessed combination, a relative and friend, called on the phone three months ago. "I just wanted to tell you it's back," she said. After almost five years in the clear, the cancer had returned - and this time to the liver. There suddenly seemed nothing meaningful to say. "Oh don't worry about me," she said calmly. "This is the Lord's way." She died quite quickly, just a few days before America exploded. She was in great and growing pain, but the calm - the serenity - was always there. The Lord was at her side - and waiting for her on the other side. Like the nurses and doctors in the hospice, I found that her almost buoyant fortitude evoked a kind of awe. If this was death, where was the sting? And I felt again - like so many of you, perhaps - the lack of a faith which could gather me in, end every argument, reconcile every crisis. How could God - our God, your God, any God - countenance something like this? Sermons up and down the land quavered over the question yesterday, then slithered away. Would even the dead cousin herself have stayed serene over those pictures of despair?  I like to think that, somehow, she'd have managed, that her miraculous born-again faith would have brought comfort and hope. But I also think that we need to see faith clear in this ghastly equation.  The 18 or 19 souls who hi-jacked four planes and flew them to destruction were madmen, wild fanatics, crazed killers. Choose your own adjectives and nouns. They have all been there in print these past few days. But they were also men of faith, extinguishing their own span on earth along with thousands of others, going to another place: and that is what gives them their special power. It is a power we need to recognise and come to terms with. The assumption, as George Bush sits at Dick Cheney's side, making his mighty, misty plans, is that the terrorism which wreaks so much havoc can be bombed or strafed into extinction, that its perpetrators can be killed or cowed into submission.  There are two sorts of terrorist that haunt our society. One shoots from afar and runs away or blasts a car bomb by remote control; he lives to murder another day in Belfast or Bilbao. But the other terrorist is different; he dies, by design, with his victims. The cocoon of faith - however malign, warped, grotesquely perverted - is with him in martyrdom.  That has practical consequences. It means, for instance, that all the banging of airline doors after the planes have exploded, all the familiar no-brain clumpings of security, are a redundant, self-defeating exercise. These suicide squads, so far as we can tell, had to train to be pilots, smiling benignly at their Florida trainers, so they could smash into the twin towers themselves. That will not easily happen again. The next United or American Airlines pilot threatened in his cabin will know what's in store. Forget it. Losing surprise, the tactic also loses its macabre allure.  No: the practicality changes. Call Ariel Sharon. Israelis have been offered "peace with security" for decades by a succession of passing leaders. Tel Aviv has the bomb and an army stocked with heavy equipment which far out-strips any other in the Middle East. But there is no peace with security.  A kid with Semtex wrapped round his middle can obliterate a pizza parlour or a bus queue with ease as long as he also obliterates himself. All the bluster and Cabinet meetings on earth can't touch that problem. Perhaps Arafat - poor, doddery old guy - can diminish it somewhat if he has the will and the strength. He can make life tougher for the men who build the bombs and strap them on kids. But let's be bleak about this. There will still be no peace and no security.  There is no final defence against a faith-filled lad turned into a walking bomb standing in a queue outside the Houses of Parliament or on the steps of Congress or in your local pizza parlour. Repeat: no defence. The apparatus of battle - from cruise missiles down - is ultimately useless, its every deployment feeding the faith of those waiting in line to become human sacrifices. The men who blew up the World Trade Centre and wrecked the Pentagon have one advantage we can never match in our mouthings about "war". For them, life is not cheap, but it is expendable.  There are no pat formulas for the undermining of "rogue states" or the negotiation of peace in Jerusalem, Colombo or Srinagar which can bring a magical tranquillity and deny the long history of our world; which now has Semtex on tap.  Ameliorations? Of course. One is the realisation that military might guarantees nothing. Another - because this is the 21st century - is that fashions burgeon and fade. There may be no indefinite supply of willing martyrs. Hate has its dry wells, too. But still: I look out, remember my dead relative, think of her bright, sure faith and ask myself the most difficult questions of all. How do we value this life and this existence? How do we balance normality and love against the termination or staging post of death? Where is our own faith, now that we need it?