Mrs Thatcher used to call it "the oxygen of publicity" in the departed days when the IRA was bombing and killing on a daily basis. She meant - glacially eyeballing newspaper and TV editors - that we were playing the terrorists' game when we led the front page or the six o'clock news with their outrages. That was just what they wanted. That was the pressure point of their whole campaign. Didn't we realise we were being used? And now this old refrain is back again on Tony Blair's lips. Has her oxygen of publicity transmuted into a cloud of tear gas drifting over Genoa? The prime minister puts it more emolliently, of course; he does his Honest Joe bit and wonders whether the media circus camped on the Italian Riviera got it quite right. Look at the plans for Africa and debt relief which rolled out of the Ducal Palace. Look at the roadblocks on the road from Kyoto which may have been shifted. Is the only real headline from Genoa the mayhem and death on the streets? Is the only issue stretching forward whether such summits can ever happen again?  When Mrs T mounted her charges, she blithely helped editors give her the answer she didn't want. She proscribed Sinn Fein and wiped its leaders, faces and arguments from the airwaves. She sought to cut off the oxygen at source. You couldn't, in a free society, have that. The great leader, in effect, was telling us to lie to our readers, to pretend that a problem censored was a problem solved. No dice. We had to tell it as was, not as the government wanted it to be - and our readers, going about their constantly interrupted business, wouldn't have been fooled for a second anyway. They would have known we were lying. Credibility shot all round: another way of letting terror win.  But the tear gas of publicity comes trailing more ominous clouds of doubt and debate. I remember the hundreds of letters I used to get from Guardian readers who didn't understand. They were organisers or marchers for a cause. They had filled their local high street or town square with peaceful protest on Saturday - but why wasn't there a word of that in their paper? Didn't we care?  To which, taking up pen, I mostly replied that there were dozens of rallies and demos going on in Britain every day; some espousing causes I personally approved of, some I didn't. But that was irrelevant. A march, in itself, wasn't news unless it had wider connections and news relevancies; it was merely an organised event - and any national paper which filled its pages by rote with such events would have soon run out of space and out of business.  Fair enough? Possibly, though it seldom seemed to satisfy, because the particular causes pursued by particular readers were always special. And even I, pumping out the line, had my doubts. What about (for example) the pro-life chains of people forged every April by the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child? These were huge demos round the country involving tens of thousands, yet they passed largely unnoticed and unfilmed: everywhere in the media, not just in these pages. Whether you were for or against abortion, was that right? Was there some kind of size test which should turn events into news?  But size, apparently, didn't matter. What mattered was what still matters today. A Drumcree march with violence rates far more coverage than a Drumcree troop of decorum. A rally of fox-hunting chums gathers portent if it can be spun into the pre-electoral maw of a countryside incensed. Park your lorries outside oil terminals until the pumps run dry and you're top of the TV shop. Leave a trail of destruction through Seattle or Gothenburg or Genoa, and CNN goes into globalised orbit. Want to set the politicians of the world hopping? Get on the media agenda.  Of course this G8 summit was a target waiting to be hit. In Italy (with its fine trans-Europe motorway links). Hosted by Berlusconi (boo!). Attended by George Bush (double boo!). Costing a ludicrous £100m to organise; pavilioned in security panic after Seattle; attended, naturally, by the panzer divisions of television coverage, all hunting wonderful pictures that the boredom of press conferences and staged photo opportunities can never provide. Disaster guaranteed. But some media introspection, I think, is also necessary. We didn't just happen to be there when the mayhem started. We were always part of the equation, an umbilical part of the script.  It is time to be clear-eyed over that. The anarchists (whoever they are, however many of them there were storming the barricades) wanted the oxygen of publicity; so, more peacefully, did the tens of thousands of protesters who travelled in to make an often bewildering variety of separate points. So, enfolded in pomp, did the G8's loftiest panjandrums. But reality? Reality often sucks.  In the grim, real world, far away from Genoa, Mr Blair's "Africa plan" may come to dust and Mr Bush's Kyoto vetoes may never be withdrawn. Whatever became of the countryside revolt? Look at our general election results and try to find it. Did any party, through May and June, major on the environment? No: their focus groups told them of voter apathy: even the environment department has been shuffled down   governmental pecking orders. Coming economic hard times will make that worse, not better. They always do. A Cup Final crowd gathered in Genoa is no larger, I guess, than the one the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child could put in Parliament Square tomorrow if it wanted.  Such realities arrive with no song in the heart. I want Kyoto ratified. I want debt relief as passionately as this paper campaigns for it. I've lamented, over many years, the way G8 has turned into a vapid circus of self-congratulation. But ritualised demos which spew inevitably into ritualised violence serve none of these purposes. They are mere spectator sport for the cameras of globalisation.  They won't, back home, put the heat on Bush. They will, rather, swing middle America behind him, lumping third world debt and petrol bombers in the same basket of way-out distaste. They do not - in any general democratic vote taken in the western world this year - represent an unstaunchable swell of public concern. Ask Mr Three Percent, Ralph Nader.  A phenomenon to compare with the Tolpuddle martyrs (as Tony Benn would have it)? Those martyrs had no 24-hour news channels to fill. This is something different, street theatre for media consumption. We have to report it; but as we do so, we have also to remember the one fact of contextualisation that should make any editor feel deeply uneasy. That we, in the reporting, are not innocent bystanders, but carriers of oxygen. We are, essentially, the story itself.