In the fashion of the times, let us imagine a foreign country. Our leaders and would-be leaders journey to it constantly, seeking favours, electoral inspiration, marketing gambits and focus group wisdom. Meanwhile, its own experts in such disciplines are even now voyaging to these shores, ready to hone and shape responses. Welcome to Jimmy Carville et al. If you couldn't fix it for Al Gore, you'll sure fix it for Tony. But you still come from a foreign country. British political reverence for the American way is a given, unquestioning, almost unremarked. When William Hague denounces the alien hordes, he excludes all true gum-chewers. (Indeed, having been in Philadelphia when George W was crowned, he's pathetically desperate to worship at the Washington court.) Gordon Brown perennially finds inspiration on Cape Cod vacations, a kind of honorary Kennedy. Mr B is the anxiously flexible friend of whoever inhabits the West Wing. Wham, bang, thank you for Son of Stars Wars, man.  From Millbank to Smith Square, the lessons of last autumn are read and reread. Why did Gore blow it? Why didn't he claim the Clinton boom as his own? You don't find the chancellor leaving gaps like that. Nor letting the case for public spending drift away. It's going to be November all over again: but this time the good guys and their pollsters (actually, the   same pollsters) are going to win.  Time to call a natural break. Time to accentuate the positive difference, to talk processes and people. Time, by way of melodramatic illustration, to invoke Strom Thurmond.  You have to be pretty old to remember Thurmond's great charge for the presidency in 1948 and the four southern states his cornpole racism denied Harry S Truman. But then, Thurmond is pretty old. Still there, still stirring, and still - 49 interminable years after his election - a United States senator for South Carolina. Strom Thurmond is 98. If he makes it to the end of his last term in 2003, he'll be the queen mother of Capitol Hill: and a darned sight more dangerous. Why is Thurmond back in the headlines? Because he isn't dead yet, and because he soon may be.  In December, when there was no president-elect, only judges and lawyers arguing, the undead Strom might have moved into the White House himself. He is president pro tempore (basically the longest toothed senator around). He plays chair of the Senate when the vice-president's away. Constitutionally, sheer longevity puts him fourth in line to the presidency itself - and if the supreme court had continued sucking its thumb on inauguration day, he'd have been sworn in pro tempore, acting leader of the western world.  But in death, too, the importance of being (or not being) Strom remains. The Republicans, remember, hold the presidency plus majorities in the House of Representatives and, on the casting vote of Vice-President Dicky Ticker, the Senate. I have no hot line to the Almighty, but the senator is ailing at last. When George W looks at him, he can only take one day at a time: for any day, amid fast failing health, there might be no Thurmond - only a Democrat nominated in his stead by the Democrat governor of South Carolina. So much for the Bush majority. It hangs by the bizarre orange strands of hair matted across Thurmond's head.  Let's look at the man a little more closely. He fought for decades against giving blacks their civil rights, but when at last they had voting strength, he courted them. After he jumped party and joined the Republicans four decades ago, he masterminded the southern (overtly racist) strategy Nixon used to win in 1968. He believes in flogging and hanging (and wants more executions, not fewer). He was a cold warrior of the armed services committee and an injudicious pillager of pork barrels on the judiciary committee. He does not wear hearing aids, and thus hears nothing that is said around him. He is Jurassic Park 3.  His main claim to fame lies not in legislation initiated or majestic speeches delivered - rather, and quite openly, in beauty queens bedded. He married Miss South Carolina (22) when he was 69, and had four kids by her. He is a legendary lecher. "When he dies," Senator John Tower once said, "they'll have to beat his pecker down with a baseball bat to close the coffin lid."  Well, the moment self- evidently approaches. Trent Lott prepares not to be leader of the Senate any more; George Bush polishes persuasion skills as mortality mists his new administration. And it is vital to think of the difference.  The temptation is to think of Thurmond (like his baleful mate, Jesse Helms) as a relic rendered endearing by the weight of years, a gargoyle from history miraculously preserved. We've got Ted Heath; they've got Strom. Surely Thurmond is the weird exception, not the rule? Surely he has no part in the world which Tony and Gordon and George all share?  Thurmond's final election in 1996 came when Bob Dole ran for president. Dole was young enough to be Thurmond's son. Thurmond far out-paced Dole in South Carolina. He won 51% of women voters, 20% of black voters (as opposed to Dole's 10%) and 20% of those who said they were Democrats. No fluke. At 94, too crocked to campaign much, too tired for anything beyond televi sion commercials, he was still a force. His pork barrel was never empty.  If Strom Thurmond, on his record, ran in Austria, Brussels would frown. If he ran in Germany or Italy, the Daily Mail might be moved to wrath. He could not, on that record, run in Britain. He would be detritus on the 1948 beach.  Yet here he is and here we go (or he goes). It isn't just the American electoral system which is full of debilitating anomalies: the people that system produces, and sustains, can be anomalies, too. Anne Robinson lives? For Welsh, read Yanks? Not at all. It is an endlessly fascinating, endlessly dynamic country where politicians from far afield can see lives they recognise played out in the raw. But it isn't our country. Its history pulls in odd ways. (Anyone who is 98  is  history). Its system, at state level, asks not: "What can I do for my country?" but "What can my country do for me?" Its dinosaurs never perish.  The people who will orchestrate this election - from Hague, pinching George W's schools' policy, to the heirs of Mandelson with their drawls and rasps - will ask us to believe that there is no difference, that (the Mail again) Jesse Helms should prescribe what defence policies we follow. It is, as I might say to Strom, pure tripe: but, even with a hearing aid on, he still wouldn't understand me.