The White House does something decisive about Iraq and what happens? Hark, you can hear the voices rising. Listen to "the sniping, carping, bitching, the predictable editorial comments". Watch the apostles of "cynical liberalism" get down to their corrosive business again. And that was George Bush Sr railing at his critics 10 years ago. It seems that nothing changes. A bestial Saddam Hussein still rules Iraq. Dick Cheney and General Colin Powell still sit around an American cabinet table, the civilian more virulently hawkish, the soldier more timorous about risking his men. Another President Bush frowns and sucks his thumb. Another young British prime minister snaps faithfully to attention. Here we go again.  And yet, on examination, everything is not the same; and we ought to chronicle the differences. Saddam is 10 years older - and visibly sicker. Every dictator, in the end, runs out of rope as his national guardsmen and mobster pals ponder their next allegiances. "Predictable" editorialists should watch their adjectives. Events may soon hand young George a victory which eluded old George. There will be a crude, familial relish to that moment when it comes.  But other, profounder things have altered, too. First, the belief in a new world order which saw an international coalition of forces voyage to the Gulf and a UN, freed from cold war stasis, sanction action. The   Yanks and the Brits are the last ones left in the air over Baghdad. They have no wider support; they are outside the law; they are the remnants of the old gang just plugging and zapping along. Unless world order resides solely in Downing Street and the Oval Office, we are making no progress.  What has a decade of economic blockade achieved? Nothing, except the death by starvation and disease of millions of Iraqi peasants. Have no-fly zones saved the Kurds in the north or the Shias in the south? A thousand miserable Kurdish refugees, beached on the French Riviera, would seem to think not. Is the Arab world more stable and peaceful for our beneficences? Go beat your head on Jerusalem's Wailing Wall. A fresh generation of fighters - radicalised by the TV pictures they see of dead kids in Baghdad or Gaza - is taking over. There are other eventual rulers of "terrorist states" waiting in line, and we are helping to make them what they are.  Old president George, however tetchy he grew under fire, deserves clear credit. He was right, in March 1991, to decide that Saddam must be expelled from Kuwait. He was right to insist that no negotiating fudge could forgive this aggression. Of course the oil made intervention more self-serving than it would have been in, say, the Congo, but the world beyond America guzzles gas as well. And, whatever Dick Cheney may believe, Bush was right to stop the carnage when he did. The cost of visible   slaughter had simply grown too great.  What was wrong - inevitable, but wrong - was the way that this half-victory turned to domestic politicking and froze into intellectual immobility. Saddam became a satanic totem in a personalised standoff, the man who could be given no quarter and no fresh thought. He could be bombed by a successor president in an impeachment jam. (A missile a day keeps Gallup pollsters at bay). He could be bombed by a new president wanting to show his mettle.   As he was demonised, though, his shadow grew longer. Military machines and lapdog defence contractors used him and his like to burnish their budgets. So Son of Star Wars arises with the son of George.  The difficulty here, the root of all difficulty, is not rooted in cynicism, however. Examine what George W Bush says and reckon that, for the most part he believes it and speaks for most his nation's citizens. "Our world, shaped by American courage, power and wisdom, today echoes with American ideals. We won a victory not just for a country, but for a vision: a vision of   freedom and individual dignity. For us, this is a time of unrivalled military power, economic promise and cultural influence. It is, in Franklin Roosevelt's phrase, 'the peace of overwhelming victory'.  Our noble challenge [now] is to turn these years of influence into decades of peace."  But what, once the rhetoric of his most magisterial pre-election speech on foreign affairs had ended, was the first pre-condition he cited? "Building a durable peace," he said, "will require strong alliances." It would, in sum, require a meeting of minds and a pooling of interests. And the devilish difficulty, as he looks around the globe this morning, is that "strong" alliances grow weaker.  The Tony Blair who turns up in Washington this week seeking his own pre-election moment in the sun, is the only one left (bar Ariel Sharon) playing inflexible friend. The rest of Europe grows restive; Russia and China scowl; Japan and India frown; the Middle East is in anxious uproar. That isn't just because Saddam got zapped this time with (as opposed to without) publicity: it is because America, with power but too little wisdom, has begun to see its "ideals" and "cultural influence" as the only shows in town. There's no strength to alliances built that way.  Inevitably, this week, British commentators writing in British newspapers will bang on about the "special relationship" and Mr Blair's anxiety (like the anxiety of his predecessors) to   play governor of the 51st state, always there, always agreeable. That, bobbing back and forth between Brussels and Washington, is our self-appointed "special" role and special cross. But what shrieks to be on the agenda now is more than PR spin. Blair needs to be the interpreter of Europe to America, not the bearer of mere messages back.  The better agenda was conveniently laid out last month in a policy brief - A Transatlantic New Deal - for the Foreign Policy Centre. What is the "burden sharing" that the US bangs on about? Is it troops and firepower alone or overseas development assistance? EU countries give $27bn a year to overseas projects: the US gives $9bn (just 0.1% of GDP to the ODA). Is it curbing greenhouse gases and global warming?  The plain fact is that there is already far more sharing of the global burden than George W (or his Pentagon) realise. The future fact is that - interpreted beyond mere missile counts - better balances and partnerships are there for the building. But partnerships only come between free and equal partners. What the new boy in the White House and his ancient advisers need to realise is that a partnership which excludes everyone but London and Tel Aviv is no partnership at all. What Tony Blair needs to realise is that standing mutely by his man is a recipe for strife - and for another Saddam, and another, waiting to strike.