The old president, hip broken, mind tragically blank, lies almost forgotten in a Santa Monica hospital bed: yet his dream lives. And the resilience of Ronald Reagan's dream cannot any longer be brushed aside. Like the latest PlayStation or the newest Man U strip, there is always "progress": which means that there will be a Son of Star Wars. It is not, of course, going to be an easy sell - especially here. The original version, with Ronnie playing Luke Skywalker and Gorbachev bizarrely cast as Darth Vader, was always a public relations disaster here (like Frankenstein foods). George W is not, perhaps, the "son" most immediate residents of Fylingdales would have in mind - nor William Hague his ideal uncle. But it is also time to be realistic. The question is no longer whether, just when and how. The hanging chads have settled it. Donald Rumsfeld, George Bush's defence secretary, was chairman, three years ago, of the definitive National Missile Defence commission which spurred Bill Clinton into half-hearted action. To see him emerge, second time round, on top of a Republican Pentagon is to see the future laid out before us. Rumsfeld believes in the clear, present or imminent, danger of "rogue states" - North Korea, Iran, Iraq - with nuclear missiles. Accordingly, America must have NMD. The anti-ballistic missile treaty of 1972 that stands in the way is, as he told his Senate confirmation hearing, "ancient history".   An interesting phrase, cutting both ways. Lord Roy Mason of Barnsley was Harold Wilson's defence secretary in the long ago when Gerald Ford first gave Rumsfeld the job. Even so, it's fair enough to indulge in a little archeological excavation. The ancient world of 1972, of Warsaw pact and Nato, has vanished just as surely as the world where the Shah and Saddam were the staunchest of western allies.  Why, indeed, not think afresh? That's what Tony Blair, learning the bitter lessons of the Balkans, has done over a European rapid reaction force. (Rumsfeld says American troops are coming out of Kosovo: "I've concluded over a period of years that the US isn't a good peacekeeper.") Why, indeed, not adjust to a 21st century in which the European Union is an economic competitor of Washington whose defence concerns cannot be wholly ordained from inside a distant beltway?  Why? Because any revised thinking in such areas is complicated, liable to disturb fustian concepts like the "special relationship" (words you curiously never hear invoked in DC). Ronald Reagan, perforce, had a better way. If you're selling anything new, if you're piling on extra billions of tax dollars, you have to keep it simple. Star Wars, in his bumbling, picket-fence version, was simple: a hi-tech security blanket that would keep Americans safe from alien harm. Son of Star Wars precisely replicates that pitch.  It discerns a threat - from North Korea sometime in the next 10 years, from Iran in the next 15, from Iraq in 20 (Rumsfeld commission figures) - and provides a response. It does not explicitly say that Russia, China and the Ukraine might lurk somewhere behind that thinking because, in a world conditioned by manic Hollywood villains, that would be complicated. It does not pause to explain why Pakistani or Indian nukes should always be friendly ones, and thus excluded from the reckoning.  Keep the threat simple. Make it - as Rumsfeld does - the technological alternative to deploying American boys in overseas wars, where they might get sponged by their own depleted uranium. See how cheaply such safety may be bought? "I don't personally believe that it involves much financial implication -" What's $60bn when AoL-Time Warner is worth double that? A few gallant souls on Capitol Hill have their objections, of course. They point out that North Korea is changing hugely, that any self-respecting terrorist state would probably ship its bombs to Chicago in a suitcase, that the moment you set up a small shield is the moment your enemies (if any) seek ways to find ways around it. They preach of self-delusion. But we ought to be clear that the two central arguments currently deployed against NMD aren't going to run.  One (with a long history of embarrassing failure) says the technology isn't there yet. It won't work. But Americans believe in making things work: the argument is a spur to greater effort, not a blocker. The other (with an equally long and dismal record) says Rumsfeld is wrong and that the project will, in reality, cost squillions. Of course. But that cash will go to some of the Republicans' biggest corporate donors - and to the interests served on Pork Barrel Hill. Start, and they won't stop.  In sum, if Tony Blair believes that somehow this Son won't happen, that the question about Fylingdales will never be put, he deludes himself. William Hague's pygmy interventions - snuggling up to George W, driving another surrogate stake into the European Union - are only the beginning. Mute delay isn't an option. Mr Blair must see (already) how tempting the supposed security blanket can be made to sound. Graciously extend it to cover us and we're happy. Instead, he needs to say something early - and simple.  Not impossible. 1972 may be ancient history, but Russia's 6,000 strategic missiles aren't. Abrogate the ABM treaty and bang goes Start 2 (article two, paragraph two), which is an umbilical part of the process reducing those warheads. Who wants to jettison Start 3 and the reduction to 2,000? Where's the security in that? Who can blame not just Britain, but all western Europe, for backing the idea if - and only if - Russia accepts NMD? And, of course, no one wants to cling barrenly to a hoary treaty conceived in quite other times. Let there be a new treaty which deals with the realities of a new millennium. Call for Colin Powell.  Rogue states, for what they're worth? Why not (as Senator John Kerry asks) go the US Navy way with theatre- wide defence systems that could specifically knock out Taepo-Dong Two's as they left North Korea - not rely on catching up with them much later? Easier, though not yet fully developed, technology: a specific response to a specific threat.  If security is the aim, if like most Americans you want and will pay for such security, then this is the way forward. A big tent, not a narrow blanket. Does any of it make your heart leap with joy? Not really. But observe how the weevils work, how our MoD is already reportedly "more enthusiastic" about NMD than our Foreign Office. Boys need their toys. Voters need their palliatives. George W Bush and Donald Rumsfeld will have their inquiries, their plans and their "great debate". That's a debate - for Europe and for Russia - that we can't bow out of. It's starting. Can we please begin clearing our throats?