Now we can glimpse the end of this American endgame, and pretty damned dismal it looks, too. Everything, top to bottom, side to side, is politics. Everybody has a spin. There is no higher authority - only low, calculating authority - so there can be no respect for authority, or the decisions it proclaims. That is the curse the US supreme court has brought upon itself. Some time in the next 24 hours, the ultimate keepers of the constitution have chosen to decide who will be the next president of the United States. If they let the hand recounts in Florida go on, then we'll get Albert Gore Junior. If, as they seem so minded, they stop those recounts, then it will be George W Bush. Either way, the stench of politics infects their court room.  The moment this court of last resort split five votes to four was the moment these emperors of the law lost their clothes. They became not lordly beings commanding respect, but individual human beings with a history and an angle. They became mere players in an infernal, corroding drama.  Do you hear the four horsemen of the apocalypse galloping round the Washington beltway? Keep calm. This isn't the end of the world. There will be a new president and a new administration soon and American democracy won't shatter. Doom deferred. But, equally, cynicism - prime begetter of apathy - is the only big winner here;   and there is a genuine feel of tragedy to the way that every twist along the road makes things worse.  An outsider from a foreign country called Britain has one advantage surveying such shambles. I am not, and cannot be, a partisan Democrat or a partisan Republican. I come from elsewhere. I may personally prefer some - not all - of Gore's policies, but the man himself is an uninspiring, wooden hulk. (Edna O'Brien calls him "The Wardrobe".) Bush, by contrast, may be intellectually punier, but he tells good jokes, clearly connects with middle America and has gathered some shrewd operators around him. This is a decent democratic choice, as usual: it is not the edge of some grand canyon.  The question - from night one, four anguished weeks ago - is: who chooses? The voters, by their ballots. But what if the machinery of this vast election, ludicrously rickety and fallible, isn't up to the job? What if, instead of resolution, there is no solution? Then, in democracy, we have "the rule of law". Then the legal eagles fly in.  Ah! democracy, the American way. So thorough, so zealous, so much to admire. It means that the canvassing boards who supervise the elections and the counts are political nominees. It means that the state officials who certify those returns are elected politicians. It means the same for the judges on up through the chain to the Florida supreme court (with an election in waiting, even for them, after a first term on   that bench). It means that the battalions of lawyers making their cases come from Republican or Democratic firms and translate their masters' political imperatives into legal language. It means that the administration of justice itself is politically accountable.  Good thing? Often, when the will of the people, expressed at the ballot box, needs to be turned into verdicts - on racism, say - that make the law part of the evolving fabric of society. But a bad, bad thing when the decisions to be made reach to the heart of the legal process itself, when there is, in perception, no such thing as an independent judiciary.  Because ordinary Americans understand their system of governance, they are not, most of the time, either surprised or dismayed by the politicisation of their legal machinery. They find the checks and balances of different elections, working their way out over years, broadly satisfactory. They are utterly used to politicians running for office threatening, if elected, "to throw out the liberal judges who are dragging our country down". They clearly registered the Gore warning that Bush would appoint three or four anti-abortion judges to the supreme court who could unpick Roe v Wade and a woman's right to choose.  In that way, even the US supreme court is an accepted part of the political landscape. But tomorrow's crucial vote is different. Here, essentially, the nine judges are deciding who will follow them and thus define the political lean of their court for decades to come. When they pick the president, they pick the man who will nominate their own successors. When they do that - especially as they divide along party lines - they put their authority in pawn. They signal that everything in American life is politics, which means that everything is manipulable and fixable.  There have - in retrospect - been many better outcomes along the way of the past four weeks. It would have been better if the Florida votes had been re-recounted across the state when Gore made that offer. It would have been better - first time round - if the Florida supreme court had been more flexible on time frames and more specific on hanging chads. It would have been better if the first intervention from the US supreme court had been more decisive and, perhaps, if the Florida court's final throw hadn't happened.  Then, at least, a grimacing Gore would have found his support on Capitol Hill fading away and a country ready - after a fashion - to see what President Bush could   achieve. Not an an end to argument or bitterness, to be sure: but an end that could, for a while, have been accepted.  There's no such end in sight now. The nine supreme justices have put themselves on the line and their arguments in doing so are inevitably frail. (When Justice Scalia says he wants the hand counts stopped because continuing them might undermine the validity of the election, he inevitably puts Bush's validity and his own validity above a voter intent that favours Gore.)  Ways out? Continuing the hand counts and seeing whether Gore nudges ahead is best, because - in humble, comprehensible fairness - it at least puts the ballots and the people who cast them first: but it also unleashes another month of court challenges and political furies. Only Gore, alas, would fancy being president in such dire circumstances. Stop the counts and effectively proclaim George W the winner, even though his lead was down to 96 and shrinking? Where's the legitimacy or the respect in that?  It is easy - too easy - to talk constitutional crisis. There is no such crisis here in the sense that something, at the end, will not be resolved. Hail to some new chief sometime or other. But the crisis is real in the sense that it taints and unravels America's most vital institutions and the authority of those who administer them. The politics of the damned.