Four months ago, for no apparent reason, the recorded voice of Stephen Hawking echoed ethereally round the Los Angeles convention centre. A weird, dislocated moment. The voice was backing Al Gore for President. Democrat delegations, partying on the floor, did not stop to listen - but now, perhaps, they should. This election has turned into a new, impenetrable    chapter for Hawking's impenetrable book. A chapter, perhaps, called Finality Lost. The latest twist from Florida's Supreme Court - whether or not the decision is stayed or overturned as it leaves the sunshine state for federal courtrooms to the north - means one bleak thing. Emotionally, there can be no finality along any legal route. There may be decisions from Atlanta or from the US   Supreme Court which hand the White House to George W. Bush, but there will be no settled end to the argument.  If one more Florida judge out of seven had tipped the other way on Friday night, that would have signalled a reasonable close. Gore's backers on Capitol Hill, sensing defeat there, had long since decided to abandon the Vice-President and his unavailing fight: we would surely have been watching Al and George W. embracing, good sports in defeat and victory, healing statesmen bringing the country together (for at least 15 minutes).  Forget it. The true focus - the only hope of finality - is back to the boxes of votes stacked in Leon County court house and in canvassing board cupboards around Florida.  There are 40,000 or 50,000 of them that matter. They are   the sole, emotional means left of telling America who really won - and the crazy thing is that three weeks of suit and counter-suit have brought us back only to a solution of common-sense fairness. The lawyers and politicians have merely got in the way.  Simple facts. Florida's electoral system is a broken-down joke, a mix of clanky machines and muddy law. It is not up to coping with an election of massive import and harrowing closeness.  There are four different ways of voting around the 67 counties, some ancient (like ticks on a piece of paper), some relatively modern (such as scanning marked forms into a computer). Only 25 counties use the wretched punch cards, and they, overwhelmingly, are where the problem lies.  Sometimes, as the world now knows, the punches do   not wholly detach the chad and the votes do not register on the IBM tabulating machines. You can count and recount mechanically, but only holding the cards up to the light and the human eye can discern intention. Does intention matter? It does when majorities are wafer thin.  The Bush camp, for all their arrogancies and yobbo tactics, have always had a decent case - more decent than Democrat partisans have allowed. Look, they say: if the punch mechanisms are defective, they are at least neutral; they under-count equally between candidates. They are also the chosen, agreed way of deciding. The canvassing boards in Palm Beach, Broward and Miami-Dade counties are all dominated by Democrats. The superviser who designed the butterfly ballot is a Democrat.   If you play by the rules, these are the rules. We won.  Worse still, they add, Gore is a bad loser. He will do anything to grind out spurious victory. He will shout 'Let every vote be counted' while his acolytes try to rule out tens of thousands of absentee ballots on technicalities. Desperate hypocrisy.  There is no settled pattern for counting the semi-detached chads and dimples. Different counties have already staged their hand recounts differently. Shambles. Just stop messing about and admit it: We won.  Bush's problem, though, has always been political rather than textbook technical. The 25 punch-card counties include most of Florida's biggest, poorest and most Democratic areas. Recounting there by hand would - statistically - favour Gore.  That is why the gap (in   Supreme Court terms) is down to 154, the whole presidency hanging by a chad. That is why Gore has been so desperate to set the hand recounts going.  And the trouble for the Republicans today is that, emotionally again, he must be right. Almost three weeks back he offered his own solution - a statewide hand recount with plenty of time to agree standards and analyse the ballots.  The Bush boys did not bite because (of course) they thought they might lose and wanted to hang on to the victories they had. Now the Florida Supreme Court has wrecked that strategy by ordering a statewide count of undervotes, the variously punctured chads. They have, in effect, ordered what Gore offered in early November: that a count not a court decides.   You can whisk through dozens of immediately permutating scenarios from this point. The challenges, the injunctions, the stops and starts, the threat that Florida's state legislature, with its big Republican majority, will produce its own slate for the electoral college, the doomsday forecasts of the street-fighters on Capitol Hill deciding in the mists of Janu ary. Nightmare stuff: but this is an American nightmare. Yet the answer that matters is still in those boxes. The chads are hanging in there.  You can, from afar, make too much of the political bias of judges, canvassing boards, even State warrior women like Katherine Harris. It was (remember) the Democrat Dade board who thwarted Gore by stopping recounting and the Democrat Palm Beach board which did not count chads the way he wanted.  The Florida Supreme Court divided Democrat against Democrat. The hand recounts so far have had observers from both parties in at the death and, for all the Republican noise, been conducted without fundamental challenge to their fairness.  On the ground, in short, there is more integrity and independence than the screaming politicians would   have you believe. Nor, with proper manpower, need a recount of the undervotes take long. This is not putting a man on the moon: it is scrutinising the votes from a couple of British constituencies on election night.  Is that better than Jeb Bush's legislature battalions producing their own 'victory' in the electoral college - or Tom DeLay's attack dogs picking Bush on the Hill next year?  Absolutely, if there is to be any tranquillity thereafter. It is even better than the US Supreme Court stepping in and calling an artificial halt before the ballots can be recounted - for the ballots themselves will remain, testimony to an enduring, contrary reality throughout the Bush years.  Crisis, what crisis? This, at root now, is a reality crisis. Finality Regained. <B>Key document</B><BR>
Download the Florida supreme court ruling (pdf file)<B>Related stories</B><BR>Timeline - when will America decide?
<BR>Election glossary
<BR>Graphic: Know your chad
<BR>  22 November: The chad debate - are dimples Gore's best hope?
<B>Interactive</B><BR>  Results declared, state by state
<B>Audio</B><BR>  Ed Vulliamy on Palm Beach (3mins 45)
<B>Local media</B>  <BR> Miami Herald<BR>Tallahassee Democrat
<BR>Palm Beach Post
<BR>Sun Sentinel