The saddest war memorial in the world is the Wall in Washington. Some 150 metres of black granite from Bangalore slashed through a grassy mound just below Constitution Avenue and, carved on it in their tens of thousands, the names of the Americans who died in Vietnam. No triumphalism, because there was no triumph. Just the Hanks and Marvins and bright, smiling Billy Joes who perished long ago. For what? For a deluded war against an enemy of the imagination. For a world, 35 years on, where the president of the United States wanders grinning among their - still communist - heirs and successors. Have you, he ritually asks his hosts, any news of the missing, the disappeared? There is no news. There is never any news.  Away, beyond the Wall, stands the monument to those who went to Korea and did not return - and there, just across the Potomac, is Arlington cemetery, a forest of battles past. Foreign policy is no board game. Foreign policy offers up its human pawns and hacks their memory in stone. And - the vital, the different thing about this country - America does not forget.  We talk glibly enough about the perils of isolationism and a president in waiting, once the legal farrago of Florida is over, who may - perhaps in his Texan ignorance - turn his back on us and our European dilemmas. The old soldiers of cold war diplomacy chunter their wis dom of decades past to the Daily Mail. But there is another dimension to this debate, an American dimension. The question for us in a new century filled with new challenges is what we may rightly ask for and what it is reasonable to expect that Washington will do.  It's easy to bash the United States, especially on the morning after the weekend of Hague collapse. Welcome to a slowly frying planet in which corporate power and loot come first. Welcome - soon - to $70bn or so strewn on missile shields just below the ozone layer. Welcome to more billions poured over Colombia as the war against drugs turns to war on the ground. Welcome to a land where the industries who make hi-tech weaponry and the generals who use them live in each others' pockets.  All these strands, and more, are part of the mix; yet they are not the whole story. The Wall is part of that story, too.  The history Americans remember is full of wars which need not have been fought, wars in far countries and continents where filial duty - rightly or wrongly perceived - finally called. The blood that was shed then was a debt of honour. And from that blood flows a mood and a fresh perception which shapes the politics of tomorrow, whether doled out by Bush or Gore.  The Bush people put it most clearly because they have had years of opposition to hone the line, but a hamstrung Gore, beleaguered in   the Oval Office, would not be so very different. When Condoleezza Rice, the intellect who will guide Bush's national security way, says that "carrying out civil administration and police functions is simply going to degrade American capability to do the things America has to do", she merely enunciates the thinking that made Bill Clinton steer clear of armed commitment to the horror called Bosnia. When George W inveighs against "open-ended commitments and unclear military missions", he means that US troops will be out of Kosovo within a year - just as, in practice, they will be for Gore.  What we don't see from a Europe which is the centre of our world is how American views of that world have changed. The "things that America has to do" are greatly changed. Russia isn't reckoned the rival or the threat of old. The eyes in the state department, just the other side of Constitution Avenue, have swung to East Asia and China most of all; to the Middle East and the Persian Gulf where the gas to be guzzled flows; to South America, with its encroaching poverty and its   drug baronies. That may or may not be sound judgment - but it is the judgment.  Christopher Layne, a visiting fellow at the Cato Institute, summed up the change best the other day in a piece for the Houston Chronicle. "The Atlantic alliance's original architects never intended that the United States would be responsible for Europe's security in perpetuity," he wrote. It was a "temporary shield" until western Europe could "resume the full responsibility for managing its own security affairs".  Now a Europe increasingly "peripheral to America's strategic concerns", less important both "geopolitically and economically", had to pick up its own slack. "The Bush-Rice plan is the first step towards establishing a new US-western Europe relationship based on equality... It should be seen as a potentially wise and far-sighted act of statesmanship."  You won't find the equation so clearly outlined today as secretary of state Albright or (Republican) defence secretary Cohen rally in rapid reaction to Tony Blair's standard. They can't say in terms that Europe counts for less and must expect less. They have to fudge a little, warning that "dangers to Nato and the transatlantic link are far more likely to come from European weakness than from European strength".  But don't misunderstand their essentially bi-partisan message. Nato, an unequal partnership of nations against an outside (Soviet) threat, is not the mechanism   for dealing with ethnic strife in the Balkans now - or ethnic savagery in the Latvia or the Hungary of the future. If Europe wants to put its own house in order, Europe will have to do it for itself - not bleat on the steps of the White House. We have bigger, more urgent fish to fry.  Here's the great dislocation of this disjunct debate. Our froth about incipient "isolationism" is a precise mis-reading: this isn't isolationism, but a turning of gaze and effort elsewhere. The America of Bush or Gore, in this American world, will deal with the big picture and, within it, the things that seem most vital to its current interests or obsessions. But it will not, any longer, commit more lives - more names on more walls - to the task of persuading Europe's ethnic or rabid foes to live in peace. That may be a "moral responsibility", but it belongs - as pragmatic priority - in Europe's column.  Enter the Eurosceptics and the ancient mariners, squeaking. Enter the ultimate pipsqueak, Hague. Everything, in their perverted vision, is about Brussels and straight bananas. But it isn't. It is about the America we have and the America we shall soon have. It is about a world where, without recrimination, we must fend for ourselves. It is about what - in a European Union context or some different context - we have to do for our own security. And the writing is on the Wall.