Too many endgames and no sign of an end. The official message, of course, is keep calm, trust the process, show the resilience of American democracy. Fairness and justice (in so far as they're coterminous) must prevail. Any debacle can always be gift-wrapped in the star-spangled banner. Take a week or three and it will all be over, pavilioned in familiar self-congratulation. Well, perhaps. But nobody has an easy way - indeed, any sure way - of getting from here to there. George W's duly summoned federal judge, Donald M Middlebrooks, could grant an injunction in Miami today and stop the rash of hand recounts spreading across the state: the unquantified number of overseas ballot envelopes due to be opened on Friday could, as expected, put a few thousand more votes in the Republican column: Al Gore could graciously concede and leave for a new career in touch football.  If you were betting, I suppose that might be the rosiest scenario for a resolution. Certainly the few hundred grey souls of Palm Beach County who think they might have punched the Buchanan rather than the Gore hole on election night are a pretty frail hook to hang your hat on. The ballot form, when examined, is no design triumph - but (a point the Democrats shrink from) electoral law gives you three ballot forms and three attempts to get it right; and you can always ask for help. The fact that some voters were too shy or confused to make certain may be deeply regrettable, but it doesn't justify White House limbo, especially when there's no means of proving what any individual actually did - as opposed to what they say or think they did. Tough cheddar.  The Buchanan glitch, however, is no longer the real point. Its role in history is merely as the broken lock on Pandora's box. Take some irate voters - the Buchanan confused - and move on to the 19,120 county ballots on the night deemed invalid for one reason or another. Those are the difference between a Democratic and a Republican victory in Florida and thus in America. Yesterday's small hand count - showing marked Gore gains - is good enough evidence for that. Extrapolate them in Palm Beach alone and Al's the big winner. And since we all know that now, since those figures swirl from every TV screen, Judge Middlebrooks can't make us forget it.  If Mr Bush gets his injunction, he'll be seen as the man who used the law to seize the Oval Office - justice without fairness. If he loses in court (and the judge is a Clinton appointment) then he'll have to get into the hand recount business himself - elsewhere in Florida Republican territory and in Iowa, Wisconsin and Oregon. Weeks, possibly months, not days. Perhaps Camelot might like to bid for the franchise.  It is not, you will see, much of a process: and, worse, it leaves out the human element. I was sitting quietly in a Florida hotel lobby watching cable news when Bush announced his legal crusade and the reaction of the Americans around me was, to put it gently, pretty damned irate. They'd been told for four days that Gore had been wrong to encourage lawsuits - now here was the monster hypocrite doing it himself. What a lousy piece of work!  And there lies the real, the burgeoning problem. Not that a solution, in extremity, can't be fudged out somehow: but that one half or other of this bemused, divided nation will never bring itself to accept it. This quagmire isn't about Palm Beach County any longer. If that county, with its 19,000 invalid forms, ballots again, then why not Dade and Broward and Jacksonville, all of them piling up invalids a mile high? Why not rerun the whole shooting match in every state that was too close to call? A constitutional doomsday solution to give bureaucrats and politicians alike the shakes.  There is, alas, no intrinsic fairness here. There is only the fairness of what politically appointed election officials or politically appointed judges decide. There is no way of stopping the argument.   For the moment, we see George W fingering his boil and looking perplexed, with Dick Cheney leering over his shoulder like a ventriloquist operating a dummy. We see Jim Baker - silkiest of fixers - delivering absurd lectures on the wonder of 40-year-old voting machines the manufacturers don't make any more. We see clearly, for the first time, what a Bush White House would be like. Texan outsiders marching on Washington as promised? No, the same gang of Old Pappy Bush's Washington outsiders wearing stetsons on camera.  This is not a fresh and healing administration in waiting. It's the lot America got rid of in 1992 reclaiming its turf. The election leaves it with no agenda for governing such division, even if it claims a victory. And the wretched thing is that Al Gore is no better placed.  He may, prudently, be staying quiet, toiling behind the scenes to flood Florida with lawyers and, perhaps, beginning to dent the shell of Bush confidence. But what if Middlebrooks lets the hand counts go on? What if the winner of the popular vote can eventually boast that he just about won the electoral college vote as well? How then would a President Gore work with a Senate and house which both have Republican majorities who believe "we was robbed"?  Americans, having rather little history, are prone to make too much of the history they have. The airwaves continue thick with learned professors prognosticating on what Grover Cleveland or Benjamin Harrison, let alone Harry S Truman, might have done. But history doesn't include a race like this, locked in increasingly visceral dispute, one which panders to all the worst instincts of the new breed of attack dogs on Capitol Hill. There is no kindly light at the end of this tunnel. A winning Gore would start losing from the moment he took the oath of office.  Does gridlock matter? Wall Street, last Wednesday morning, thought not. Its plump gurus emerged to praise a supposed result in which nobody would be able to do anything controversial and accustomed profits would flow. But Wall Street has got the jitters since, fretting over uncertainty - and the total certainty of total uncertainty looms. Both Bush and Gore have lost badly in the past few days. Neither Bush nor Gore - trading insults - will be able to do much more than preside for the next four years. Neither Bush nor Gore, whoever concedes in the court of public opinion, has any obvious way of claiming the only legitimacy that matters, emotional legitimacy.  Welcome to the land of happy endings, to American faith in the American way. But power, by the minute, is becoming detached from the public support - or acquiescence - that gives it meaning. Sometimes there are no happy endings.