Here in West Palm Beach is global crisis centre, otherwise known as the Palm Beach Judiciary Facility, a shining legal temple in beige and brown marble somewhat larger than the Palace of Westminster. This is Veterans Day weekend. The facility is closed for three days. Never let the end of the world get in the way of a statutory holiday.   Down the road, the veterans of wars past are preparing for their annual stiff-backed, pot-bellied march, led this year by General Alexander Haig, who never got enough votes to become President himself.  Even further down the road, at Democratic Party headquarters, a squad of lawyers are taking affidavits from a chattering queue of the old, infirm and blue-rinsed. Across at the City Hall car park, dozens of TV vans with dishes pointed to the sky stand ready to flash the news as it happens.   But, apart from six rota protesters on interview duty by the car park, there is no news. The news, like George W. Bush and Al Gore, will have to wait; at least until Tuesday, when a circuit judge hears the first case about befuddled balloting, and probably rather longer. Some people are working. The same groaning gang which brought the first count and the recount are counting again, this time a random sample of one per cent of the ballot forms plus a hand count from the three most contentious precincts. They, like other Florida counties staging a re-recount, will report by Tuesday (though Broward, just to the south, has been treading water because the supervisor of elections went on holiday on Thursday and didn't leave a telephone number).  Carl Hiassen, the barbed chronicler of Florida absurdity, couldn't have invented a script like this. What is West Palm Beach? The dowdier partner, across the bay, of Glitz City. If the Palm Beach Post hadn't had the future of the White House to write about, it would have been stuck with 'Boy unhurt after riding bike into car's path' or possibly Jupiter town council's efforts to confer 'historic status' on the Burt Reynolds Dinner Theatre which, at 21, is more threatened and slightly less historic than Burt's toupee.   The big TV boys, down from Atlanta or New York, can stage their town meetings, full of earnest confrontations, but essentially this is a sleepy little hollow of a place, a stretch of communities, Lake Worth, Boynton Beach, Delray Beach, Boca Raton,  where nothing much is intended to happen because there are guards on the condominium gates and the sweltering sun drains energy away. 'They're making us look like fools,' says Dave at the drug store counter. He's talking about the Lenos and Lettermans of the late, jokey television shows. Leno: 'Who's counting the vote down there? Don King.' Letterman: 'This is what happens when elections aren't fixed. They're this close.' Too many sketches about doddery OAPs holding the nation to ransom. Palm Beach County doesn't altogether like the heat.   It quite enjoyed the first couple of days when Clematis Street and Banyan Boulevard were full of camera teams eager for every last soundbite, but now the thrill, like Wall Street, is subsiding. Something was clearly wrong last Tuesday. Pat Buchanan, the candidate of right-wing oblivion, got 3,407 votes, far more than anywhere else in Florida. That was strange, especially when most of his votes came from Jewish and black precincts.   Equally mystifying, some 19,120 votes, about four per cent, were ruled invalid because the antiquated election machines had punched a vote for two candidates, not one. How could that be? Delray Beach residents wave copies of their 'butterfly',  or two-sided,  voting slips, which are indeed pretty confusing, ranging the Buchanan punch hole just below Bush and just above Gore. Some mistake here, surely?   The blue rinses outside Democratic HQ echo Ovadia Rechtman, who is 77 and legally blind. 'I punched the wrong one and it worries me to death,' she says. The interviewees in the car park all say they punched the right hole, for Gore, but speak about the difficulties on the night: 'These machines are 50 years old. You have the card and it doesn't fit exactly. It wasn't easy: it was damned difficult.'Enter Jesse Jackson, leading a TV rally on the steps of the judicial facility. Enter the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, beginning, yesterday in Miami, to collect more horror stories from other Florida counties (of which there are plenty). You don't need to believe there was rigging here: you would find it difficult to believe something wasn't seriously wrong with a machine that produced nearly 20,000 dud votes in Palm Beach and 18,000 in Miami's Dade County, but only 54 in Citrus County, where they put crosses on a piece of paper.Part of the problem with the punching is that sometimes it doesn't make a proper hole, the 'chad' (the piece of paper that has been punched) hangs loose and the counting mechanism discards it. That's the point for the manual recounts, trying to assess what the voter intended. Sometimes humans are full of error. When Bush's narrow lead over Gore dropped in the first recount from more than 1,000 to 327, part of the gain for the Vice-President was because a computer operator had simply pushed the wrong button.   Florida's 25 electoral college votes, and the presidency, seem to hang on lousy machines that there's no cash or will to replace, butterfly forms which may, or may not, contravene state law, voting systems designed to repel rather than encourage voters from the minority communities, plus a fat slice of human fallibility. The protesting few outside Palm Beach court house have 'Banana republic' scrawled on their placards.   And that, in a malign way, is the real difficulty for Florida today. There's no doubt what the great and good of Washington and the New York Times would have it do. Stop making difficulties: stop giving the Gore camp, and the legions of Democratic lawyers descending on the state, the legal opportunity to keep dragging out 'the proces'. It is not only the election supervisor in Broward County who's due a holiday: the TV anchormen and pundits want one, too. Florida is being muscled to conform. But Florida has a mind and an identity of its own. Miami is Little Havana where English is an alien language and the shop signs offer 'Dinero. Al instante'. Miami is Little Haiti, where nearly 200,000 exiles from the Duvalier dictators and their dubious heirs cluster in Caribbean hovels and a guy in red bathing trunks walks through the streets with a seven-foot python wound round his neck. Miami is art deco hotels and yuppies thronging the cafes on Ocean Drive, and Brazilian quarters and Argentine restaurants and the poor blacks who live in fly-blown suburbs like Opa-Locka, queueing to find a cot in the dank gloom of Tucker's Rooming House.   We are not, in short, talking about the view from Seventh Avenue or Georgetown. Jeb Bush, Florida's governor, is George's younger, more personable, brighter brother. When you take opinion on the streets of Miami, the cynicism is corroding. 'It's just so shady. It makes me sick, says one man.  'What's he [Jeb Bush] going to do? Not now, but before all this. He's got his men. What are they doing on election day?' he asks. 'Am I surprised? How could that be?'  There's a sense in which Florida has become a mirror of America. Split, down the middle. The big city, Miami, dominated by Democrats, whether poor blacks and immigrants or the moneyed young who came out on the day for Gore. Condominiums crawl up the Atlantic seaboard filled with winter-fleeing New Yorkers in their retirement.  Go higher, though, and Jacksonville is more of a real city filled with more real Florida people. It went Republican, like Tampa over on the Gulf of Mexico and the Panhandle out to Pensacola, which is Alabama and Georgia continued by other means. The South, the East, the industries, the holidaymakers, the fruit farmers, the immigrants pouring in, the old folk sleeping in the sun: this is America. It is also a reason to be careful.   Bill on the Palm Beach City Hall placard line has it pretty much right. A judge will sit on Tuesday: other judges will ponder that decision for as long as a case survives. 'But people in this country can pick the judges to suit the circumstances because they know where those judges are coming from,' says Bill. Of course. Gore fought a campaign which warned that Bush would pack the Supreme Court with anti-abortion judges. Is Florida going to persevere with an interminable round of hearings which keeps the White House twisting in the wind?   For all the sound and fury, the recounts will be over this week and the vital tallying of absentee ballots, maybe 3,000 or 4,000 of them, will end on Friday. After that, it will either be lawyers in suits or, probably, a concession from Gore: and lawyers here are more despised, more feared for their cupidity and wiles, even than journalists.   West Palm Beach and Delray and the rest aren't primed for that kind of struggle. Thanksgiving is coming. The signs for 'Pumpkin Cream Whip Pie' are hanging out already. In the bars and cafes, you can already sense a kind of incredulity that this can be happening. 'Have I won my bet on the presidency, Freddie?'  'Gee, I didn't know it was over yet.' Small (retired) town America won't fight this one through if Al Gore pulls out the legal eagles and pulps the affidavits. Only more genuine glitches in the counts, more significant chads, and maybe an absentee surprise, will keep America and Wall Street and the world (in no particular order) in limbo.   But a resolution is not an end. It will not convince the blue-rinse queues that Tuesday was fair. It will not convince the young activists on the placard line that justice has been done. In particular, it will leave the poor of Miami,  the Cubans, the Guatemalans, the refugees from Haiti, believing that this America, the shining city on the hill for which they fled their flyblown countries, is just another Third World slum of slime.   Florida is the gateway state, one step from the continent to its south, and sometimes less than a step. It will succumb in the end as Washington (and political reality) calls the shots. But it will not, I think, go happily. It knows in its heart that Palm Beach County was a shambles, and it knows of too many other shambles all around. But arent there shambles everywhere, ask anxious Republicans. Sure, but not as public, not as visceral, as this one.   President Bush, if it is he, may not have much of a national mandate. In Little Haiti and Opa-Locka and Delray Beach, make that no mandate at all.