It was a long night's voyage into fog - and the great battle fleet of TV flagships was lost, sunk without trace and apology. American television is fond of showing the election that newspapers called wrong, Harry Truman waving the headlines of his non-defeat by Dewey. This, 52 years later, was payback time, a debacle of million dollar gadgetry and pseudo-science. Soon after 8pm eastern time on Tuesday (1am Wednesday British time) the networks, one after the other, processed the exit polls and gave Florida's 25 electoral college votes to Al Gore. It was a crucial projection. Had he been the predicted loser there, many Americans might have finished their beer and gone to bed early. Now he looked like a possible winner.  But just under two hours later George W Bush, surrounded by indignant family, could be glimpsed claiming that "the people actually   counting the votes have come to a different perspective. I'm pretty darned upbeat about things".  Within 10 minutes CBS, ABC and CNN, with NBC traipsing behind, put Florida back in the undecided column, where it lay for another four hours until the networks called a Bush win.  But soon Mr Bush's supposed 50,000 lead in Florida had turned to a paltry 1,000. Florida, and the election, was once more too close to call.  Television, in short, had spent 10 hours of running up and down hill, claiming certainty, building edifices of punditry and prognostication along the road, then demolishing them in a trice. Even the two exhausted candidates had no other information to go on at the end, and the information was humiliatingly duff.  What went so abjectly wrong? All the giant TV corporations in America, with their feeds around the world, rely on thousands of field workers from the Voter News   Service who stand outside polling stations and ask a random sample of exiting voters to fill in a form saying how they cast their ballots and answer subsidiary questions about their motives. Those results, fed into computer models back at the networks, allow the TV channels to name winners or losers as soon as the real polls close.  That is extremely convenient. It makes a better show and, in theory, delivers a clear verdict before the mass viewing audiences go to sleep. The gratification of knowing is almost instant. You skip the dragging boredom of the real count and real numbers.  But what if, as Voter News Service reported, "the vote is strange"? What if there's a tangle between the data going in and the projections coming out? What if the swiftly increasing numbers of people here claiming postal ballots, people who never go near a polling booth, don't echo the trends of the people who appear in person?  Then you have egg on your face.  It has happened in small ways before with Senate races. This time, however, the result is a monster omelette. The men who would be president have been put through a ridiculous, essentially phoney ordeal. A watching   audience around the world has been force fed ersatz omniscience. There will, in the American way of things, be a terrible inquest. The voices who want exit polling abolished are already loud.  Very little from the longest night of punditry survived into the light of day. Reports of a monster turnout - a repeatedly claimed triumph for resurgent democracy - proved wildly overblown. Bush versus Gore barely scrambled above the 49% apathy of Clinton versus Dole four years ago.  The commentators' favourite talking point - What if Gore wins the electoral college but Bush wins the popular vote? - looked apposite enough, but was entirely the wrong way round.  What wisdom survived? Only the banal. "Florida does not mean Gore is going to win the election - but it does mean we're in for a long night", said an already weary Dan Rather on CBS.  "The analogy isn't threading the needle any longer, it's a pinball machine," said Mac McLarty on NBC.  "This is going to be a painful night for the person who loses," said Judy Woodruff on CNN.  And a universal anthem: "Because we're calling a race too close to call, doesn't mean it's close.