Welcome to the federal super-mess, its leadership of the free world buried amid a paper mountain of used Florida ballot papers. The nation is split from top to bottom with almost malign precision. A president who loses the popular ballot but wins in the creaking machinery of the electoral college? Probably. A Senate virtually tied, whose vote has no trace of proportionality to it so that the wastes of North Dakota count for as much as all California; a House of Representatives desperately divided on partisan lines which only crudely reflects the wishes of the electorate. Is this the will of the people? Any other sophisticated country, anywhere else in the world, would be talking animatedly about constitutional reform in such a bind. But don't hold your breath. This is America. When the wagons of democracy are so rickety, it is no surprise if wheels fall off. The smallest change can produce a grinding hiatus. Take Ralph Nader and the Greens. There were four battleground states left undecided when most of America went to bed on Tuesday night - Iowa, Wisconsin, Oregon and, of course, Florida: in all of them the size of the Nader vote far outstripped the gap between Gore and Bush. If Gore winds up at the bottom of the never-everglades, there'll be plenty of Democrats who will put the blame on Ralph - just as Nader is saying already that "Al Gore has nobody to blame but Al Gore." But, in reality, the system is not up to coping with or interpreting such splits.  Nader, at around 3% of the popular vote, has nothing to show for what was   essentially an insurgency from within the Democratic party: no seats, no hope of future federal election funding. The causes he espouses - abolishing the death penalty, gun control, emptying the privatised prisons, reform of campaign funding, the extension of healthcare to all - are further from realisation than they were before the polls opened.  Such progress along that path as Gore offered (in a limited, cautious way) is off the agenda for at least another four years. George W Bush sits on the opposite side of the planet - and the Democrats have a library full of polling verdicts to tell them that if they stray too far left, too far from the cloying centre, then they will lose again next time. When Nader says he won't go away, he effectively pushes everything he believes in still further into the future.  That is no way to run a huge and various modern country. The system as it has grown excludes: it excludes the poor and the illiterate and the desperate in their millions, it encourages the apathy and disillusion which, even among the confected excitement, characterised this race. If genuine strands of dissent can't be included within the fabric of the two historic parties, then they have to be found a place which sits beside those parties. Not to do that merely guarantees further rents in the intricately woven cloth of US society.  Ah yes! But here come the legions of   pundits and constitutional historians raising the prospect of change only to dismiss it. What would Thomas Jefferson have made of such reformist talk? The guys at the heart of the action have a vested interest in not altering its course, remembering the George Wallaces and Ross Perots of relatively long ago and writing off far smaller revolts - like Nader's - as ephemeral.  Fine. Yet you can have too much of history. The grisly fact of this election is not that the people haven't spoken, because they have: the problem is that they have said almost entirely contradictory things in almost equally large numbers. A great fat "don't know". Does that mean, as some would have it, a kinder, gentler Washington? Do not believe it. The men of supposed goodwill trooping across your TV screens are the heirs of Newt, new Gingriches of gridlock. They weren't sent back to the house on the hill to be statesmen; they're streetfighters.   There will be no "coming together" when the next hill race, two years on, can break the stalemate. There will be no meaningful reform of the obscene billions of dollars - double even the 1996 number - lavished on Tuesday's contests. There is no pat compromise between school vouchers and education as usual, or between drug companies and the impoverished sick. And yet there is also a natural clustering around the sweet centre when the votes are called and the big campaign money pours in.  The temptation in the wake of Tuesday is to pin everything on personalities and the supposed gaffes of the campaigns. How on earth did Gore manage to neglect his trump card of a buoyant economy for so long? Why does nobody think Bush competent? In reality, however, these are only transient matters, the stuff of spin doctors and the breed   of "experts" who made such a TV ass of themselves. The important question now is how America moves forward after six years of prosperity without progress on Capitol Hill. That situation hasn't got better after this contest. It has grown measurably worse - and the introversion it begets should make us all shiver a little.  Ralph Nader, to be sure, overdoes the malevolency of corporate power and soft money. You sometimes think that AT&amp;T or Microsoft are his equivalents of George W's rogue terrorist states. There needs to be some proportion here. But proportionality matters in a far greater context.  America needs a system which forces it to work together - and to vote together. The big parties, losing membership and appeal, aren't smart enough to put true inclusion first any longer. The sophistry of inclusion - like Bush's convention pitch to blacks - doesn't work. What? Surely not PR for the United States of America. Hogs may fly! But put the proposition another way.  America is an intensely democratic country with freedom in its bones. That, more then brute power, is what gives it world leadership. It is also a practical country. In practicality, its checks and balances don't function well any longer. In practicality, the balance between the shrunken giants is too enervating. In practicality, too many of its citizens can find no way of claiming a stake in a system which turns its back on them. No child will be left behind? I'm afraid not.  The anxious frothing about the difference between the popular vote and the electoral college is more than mere debating. America has started at last to think about the quality and relevance of its democracy. It would be good if, once started, it could keep thinking through to a finish. You can't start using words like "legitimacy" without defining your terms from first principles.