Eight days left; a near dead heat in the polls; excitement and apprehension rise. What hangs on Bush? What swings with Gore? Time to calm down, even hose down. So I went to see the supreme guru of measured analysis for an extra helping of laid-back wisdom. Professor Seymour Martin Lipset, in London for a lecture tonight, has been America's best, most prolific political scientist for four decades now. He has watched all the presidents of that time come and go - but, more important, he has watched the changes in his country, too. He is in no sense cynical or battle-worn, but he is relaxed. Is George Dubya a raving right-winger? Nah! He's a "right centrist"; just like Al Gore is a "left centrist". Both naturally congregate in the middle. Bush started off in the familiar out-of-town way, attacking Congress and Washington, but then McCain cropped up and he had to veer for a while to the right of his party. Now he has tacked back to where he started from. Gore, in parallel, had to see off Nader before turning turtle.  Remember what Nixon told Bob Dole. "You head right to get the nomination; you head left the moment you've got it." Remember that Ronnie Reagan's California was the first state to pass a pro-abortion bill and that Ron spent his time in the sun trawling round anti-abortion meetings making mood music but never doing a damned thing. "Remember, except for foreign policy, that the president is weak. Clinton hasn't got his last budget yet."  You can talk about what you intend to do. Doing it in office is wholly different - and the talkers and the promisers know that, just as the voters do. Look at the way Capitol Hill inevitably operates, seldom giving any one party control of the White House, the Senate and the Congress. No accident, because different constituencies. Choosing a president is one thing; choosing a senator to represent the broad swath of opinion in his state is another; choosing a congressman with a far narrower, more defined and partisan constituency is still another. There is an almost automatic balance. Maybe, just maybe, the Republicans will take all three this time, but if they do it will be by such a narrow margin that the soft blur of party lines - especially in the Senate - will leave scant room for manoeuvre anyway.  And foreign policy? Lipset knows Condaleeza Rice, the likely national security adviser, well. A strong, bright lady. He knows Colin Powell, the likely secretary of state, and the other prospective aides clustering at his side. He is unalarmed. They are capable people. Whatever else Bush may or may not be, he looks like a good chooser.  If you are as mellow as Lipset, you see awful (alleged) threats in a kindlier light. Whatever happened to the (1980s)   threat of "a natural Republican majority"? Education happened. The Republicans still have an armlock on the deep South - except where the Democrats work to a strict black agenda - but their Golden West isn't so golden any longer. Folks got richer and thus they became more educated. Funny thing! That doesn't help the Republicans one jot. The more you know - in the broadest terms - the likelier you are to vote Democrat. And the awful threat of a swelling Hispanic population, the death of America as a homogeneous, English-speaking nation? Another defunct spectre.  "There isn't a Hispanic race. There are Argentines and Guatemalans and Spanish and Mexicans. They come from different countries - and they are different. I'm told Texan Mexicans and California Mexicans are different. But what happens to them all? They arrive, some of them prosper, and they become Americans who want to speak English, must speak English, because not being able to marks them out as second class." Natural, unafraid integration.  Anyway, immigration is the key. "I went to lecture in Japan a few years ago, when the Japanese miracle was going full speed, and I got annoyed. America, I told them, is an open society - and where would you be if we didn't buy your cars? Every society goes soft in the end and we've got the answer to that. We let in hungry people. I have no fear of you. Our Asians will beat you in the end."  The temptation, as he rattles along, is to think him complacent. This is a temptation to resist. Lipset is a shrewd observer of what really comes to pass and what may happen next once the headlines have faded. He is absorbed not just by the activists of politics, but by the millions in the middle who, frankly, aren't that interested. Voter turnout heads down. Some 30m watched the recent televised debates, as opposed to 90m when they first started.   But is that necessarily bad - or just that the missing ones don't think it makes much difference who wins, who holds the centre? If they think that, they may not be all wrong. But watch, with satisfaction, Pat Buchanan and the cracked shell of the Perot party disappear below 1% on the polls. Apathy can be the enemy of extremism. Because folk don't care this time, though, doesn't mean that they won't care next time if there is an issue they see clutching them by the throat. "This is not an angry country, whatever the commentators say. Some have strong views, maybe strong religious views. But they're not angry now."  The virtue of the political scientist lies in setting a broader context and noticing what happens offstage. Has American "exceptionalism" - the totality of factors that set it apart, and the theme of one of Lipset's most lauded   books - changed in the last five years? Yes: and he offers an example from his time at Stanford University in the Palo Alto shadow of Silicon Valley. Call it the explosion of young wealth.  Look at house prices in Palo Alto. Almost everyone who lives there is a millionaire; indeed, has to be to live there. "I went to a cocktail party and there were 13 billionaires in the room." He has a daughter who works as a psychiatric social worker in the city and some of her patients have a recurring question for her. "What am I going to do with my money?" Maybe lose it; maybe pour it into the universities and charitable foundations, maybe build new palaces in Newport, Rhode Island,   to dwarf the palaces that America's industrial rich built in the 1890s.  At any rate, what's exceptional about the American future "is a bigger, wealthier class". It alters the balances; it chips away at the accustomed order of things. "Elites, you know, are very anxious what people think of them. They want to be thought well of and they're anxious to help that process."  A new era of philanthropy? Perhaps. But probably a new era of exceptionalism which leaves Europe and "post- feudal" Britain behind. Lipset's legacy: don't get mad, get reflective and get informed.