Hope Street South, a couple of blocks away from convention centre, used to be an acrid joke: just another street of the hopeless, the druggies and prostitutes, the rootless and deranged sleeping rough. But now that Carmela has built her Villa de la Esperanza the pavements are pristine - and you know instinctively again, with a blessed relief, that politics can be serious, that it can still make good things happen.  One LA store, seeing the Democrats coming, laid on a special show featuring 40 flavours of tofu. Another joke as malign metaphor.  What else can you think about long days of speeches from congressmen desperate for re-election interwoven with Los Lobos, Luther Vandross and marching bands? How else do you explain the great 8pm exoduses to rubber-necking nights with the stars across Beverly Hills? Bring me your poor and your hungry and Ally McBeals.  But Carmela believes in hard cases, not soft money. She runs the National Association for the Hispanic Elderly and she restored her street as a 202 project - which, being interpreted, means that the government gave her some cash and she used it to build sunny new flats for old people in desperate need.  "Many of them had nowhere to go. They slept in their cars."   Today Carmela is throwing a party. She calls it a "senior power fiesta" and, indeed, a Mask of Zorro Mexican band twangs away as her guests flood into the tent in her garden. But nobody, at root, is celebrating. This is business for all the lobby groups who try to look after the old in America: and business, too, for vote-hunters everywhere.  Will Gordon Brown, in his profound unwisdom, ever try another 75p pension rise? Surely not. He's felt the strength of pensioner power. He should come to Hope Street instead. Seniors can get organised. Seniors vote. In the   1996 presidential contest, 67% of the over-65s turned out on polling day - as opposed to 32% of the 18 to 24s.  That, potentially, is formidable clout. It delivered the beginnings of Medicare 35 years ago. It brings young politicians dancing attention to Carmela's tent. Andrew Cuomo (son of Mario, with dad's gift of the gab) is the cabinet secretary for housing and urban development, the master of project 202. He's married to a blond Bobby Kennedy daughter. She makes a point of coming, too.  "If you don't respect your elders, what kind of society   are you? What does that say about you?" Mr Cuomo asks. The serried ranks of his audience, the silver heads amongst the bald, rise. Here is an issue with bite.  When Medicare began prescription drugs were few and far between. They weren't covered. Now the drugs that keep heartbeats steady or arthritis at bay are the staple of American existence - but their prime users, inevitably the old, have to pay. In soundbite terms, they must often choose between their drugs and the food on their table.  Al Gore has promised to   help. George W is predictably keener on tax cuts all round. Can senior power get mobilised? If it can - and the pollsters already find Al Gore with a fat lead among women over 65 - then fortunes will shift.  "You are guests in my house," says Carmela. "Come inside, for guests must eat." The potency of the message is its niceness, its generosity. It shows what big government can still do if it chooses - and how that choice may be made.  Back at the Staples Centre, another kind of fiesta pounds ritually on. A video of   Stephen Hawking endorsing Mr Gore as "the man of the future" flashes bizarrely from the roof. Delegates wave banners which proclaim, equally bewilderingly, "New Britain for Gore". Retired TV anchorwomen talk on stage about their mental health problems. Joe Lieberman, vice-president-in-waiting, pushes shyly through the crowd.  Where's the beef? It's there when Bill Bradley talks about the 44m Americans without health insurance - but soon lost among the bored chatter. You want beef? Come see Carmela. She's got a cry with a ring. Viva Lieberman