Meet Bill's babes - or perhaps, straining at the future, Al's gals. They are younger and marginally less groomed than their Republican sisters. They do not cling to hubby's arm or flutter eyelids. They have shoulders without pads and opinions of their own to spare: the putative storm troopers called Women for Gore. And they are desperately needed. What was it the Declaration of Independence said? Up on the convention podium pops a sleek young actor from one hit TV show (The Practice) Channel 4 hasn't bought yet. "All men - with women implied - were created equal." But just try to be a touch more inclusive next time, Mr Jefferson.  The steadier pollsters of this election year report three gender gaps. Men (54% to 40%) are George Dubya fans - while women (52 to 40) go for Gore. But those respective leads are even greater in prospective congressional election voting. So Al is running behind his party, and is way off the old Clinton pace. He's got to be loved and   cherished pretty damn quick.  Thus the Kennedy women - Caroline and Katherine - are summoned to stand alongside unsteady Teddy and evoke a glorious past (the Los Angeles nomination of 1960) which burns still in party memory.  Thus the women's caucus convenes in revivalist session - hundred upon sweating hundred trapped in the black hole of the Wiltshire Grand lobby while the secret service (men of course!) lugubriously sweep the room. "Sit down, sit down," plead the organisers as a booming video screen exhorts us to "Stand up, stand up - for choice, for medicare".  Thus hours of main convention time are devoted to a celebration of woman senators, each of them in turn pulling the levers marked equal pay and kids' education and care for the elderly and the right to choose (not to have a baby). Constant invocation: if women - 52% of the electoral roll - are with us, we must win. (And losers get to do the dishes.)  The star of both shows is, of course, America's most famous long-suffering wife, the Tammy Wynette of the White House. Hillary Clinton, however, is not a pastel-hued speaker. She intones. "We're not giving up. We're not going back." She gropes for a slogan. November is "all about women's choices - and choice".  And, in LA at least, she's a wow. She raises the roof   everywhere. Odd, because she does the "human" bits - her mother's experience as a foster child, the kids who stopped her and Bill on the '92 campaign trail with a banner that read "Give us 8 minutes and we'll give you 8 years" - with all the melting emotion of Terminator 2. When she talks about "Bill and I sitting together the other day, looking at old photographs of Chelsea", her incredibility is total.  There are women here who lift the spirits. Ann Richards, the wondrous ex-governor of Texas, is Dennis Skinner born again as Mae West. Jeanne Shaheen, the governor of New Hampshire, radiates calm competence. A formidable 66-year-old retired schoolteacher tells how she grew sick of the good old boys never emptying her dustbins and promptly got herself elected mayor of San Bernadino.  But Mrs C isn't quite in that class yet, which prompts an uneasy thought. Is it "women's issues" that will turn New York for her and the nation for Gore? The polling worm in her Big Apple, it transpires, are women themselves. They prefer the Gary Lineker lookalike called Rick Lazio. And somehow you can't see earnest plodding family man Al this Thursday night topping the adulation reaped by Bill with his Mick Jagger rip-off entrance down a long, long tunnel, easy as a lizard in his skin. Ah! There was a man. Choices, choices.