The funny thing, looking down from the gods of the convention balcony, is how old they all are. The party of the future - led by the president for the 21st century - is the party of arthritic knees, stomach acid and hernias. Tax breaks for toupees and face-lifts? That would have raised a cheer. And the funnier thing, to a visitor from the allegedly old country, is how nobody seems to notice. George Junior, basking in the spotlight he loves, is older than Bill Clinton, who is departing after two full terms.What's   most obvious about running mate Cheney? Not his Attila voting record or even his three heart attacks. It's that he can barely trot, let alone run.  Dick Cheney, dark-suited, dumpy and follicly challenged, looks a good decade beyond his certified 59. The past is always with him: the years in the White House backrooms with Ford, the congressional years, the years at the Pentagon. Those years lie heavy. They are, oddly, his ticket to ride.  "Eight years ago, when I completed my time as secretary of defence, I loaded a U-Haul truck and drove home to Wyoming," he declaimed on his big night. "I didn't plan on a return to public office. Lynne and I settled into a new private life. There was time for fishing and grandchildren..."    Now who did you last see loading his domestic clobber   into a hired van and heading into the distance? Got it. Ken Clarke, '97, pottering back to Nottinghamshire and his own white-haired wife. But Ken - around the same age as Dick, with added hair - is yesterday's man, consigned to oblivion by the teenage Turks of the succession.  That is not remotely the American way. The "young country" of Tony Blair's longings is Japanese in its veneration of elderly pols. The key to success isn't a little Leo in every cot, but bushels of grandchildren. Al Gore wheels his in a stroller along the beach of photo-opportunity. Family, family.  A George Junior home advantage? I'm not sure about his blonde twins as they fidget and yawn in the celebrity box. They look kind of restless in pre-wild-oats mode. But W has strength in depth. There's nephew George P doing his podium bit already,   and nephew Pierce, a 14-year-old Mekon of political jargon to shame the juvenile Hague.  No, the trouble is all behind him. Proud dad George Senior can't stop taking bows and - worse - responding on camera to Clinton when the wondrously shrewd Bill portrays W as a cossetted rich kid. Proud mum Barbara is playing the Queen Mother for all she's worth. There are so many Bushes hogging attention that you don't need to see the shoulder pads to think of Dynasty.  The effect is curiously choking, an everlasting Bush family Christmas of the airwaves.  Back, back to the future. The gerontocracy rules curiously OK. Second world war vets, Korean vets, Vietnam vets. It may play well, but is this the real America? Maybe Prezza Hezza should up sticks and head west - this country needs him.