Closed borders, closed minds. Your heart used to sink as you neared Checkpoint Charlie. It sank again a few weeks ago at the post on the Lahore-Amritsar road: the two sides of a divided sub-continent stare at each other in curiosity and incomprehension. But surely this barren, dusty roadway outside the old Ledra Palace Hotel, symbol of Cyprus carved apart, is the most dismal spectacle of the lot. I was here half a lifetime ago when the UN peacemakers moved in. They are still here. And there is still no brokered peace. The Berlin wall has crumbled. The first weeping families from South Korea are hugging their long lost relatives in the north. Yet in today's Nicosia, affluent, smiling in the summer sun, an hour away from the crowded beaches of package tourists stripping off for Sky TV cameras, nothing moves and the lemons taste familiarly bitter.  Ethnic cleansing? Cyprus had it first before the phrase was glibly coined. Cyprus still has it. Ethical foreign policy? Cyprus never had that - from its blinkered British rulers, their American cold war cousins, from the fascist, manipulative Greece of the colonels, from the Turks 40 miles away across a deep blue sea. Cyprus is the sum of all blunders, living testimony of man's inhumanity to man and diplomacy's feeble resolution.  How many times since invasion of 1974 have they tried to sort it out? One battered negotiator counts 17 initiatives - and shrugs. So many years,   so little to show. And what are we to expect this week as Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots return to Geneva for the third round of the so-called proximity talks, where Greeks and Turks polish their nails in separate rooms while UN chaps hover alongside US and FO goodwill envoys? Waste of time, he says: and, damnably enough, none of the participants disagrees. Another slow boat to no-where around Lac Leman.  Yet, whether those involved quite realise it or not, there is beginning to be a difference. The faces at their separate tables may be the same. Glafcos Clerides and Rauf Denktash, rival community champions, have been together now for 40 years (maybe a day too much). But the context in which they meet and fail to agree is changing hugely. This is an EU problem now. Join Europe - old, sweet song - to keep the peace. Join Europe for prosperity, a single market, single currency - and, in time, for a common defence and foreign policy. OK: I've heard Mr Blair and Mr Chirac. I've read the menu. But this dusty stretch of desolation outside the Ledra Palace  is Europe. Greece itself is a euro-hugging member in good standing.  Mr Clerides waits top of the pending queue. Turkey, with due panoply, was solemnly accepted as a candidate member in Helsinki last winter and signs the necessary protocols this autumn. Is this Europe, our Europe of florid aspiration and misty rhetoric, going to pretend that the walls, wire fences   and checkpoints across the width of Cyprus don't exist? What, 26 years after the Turkish army hit the beaches, is so frowningly intractable here. Would President Chirac like to clear his throat?  The components of continuing crisis can be amplified interminably over the wasted years or contracted in contentious simplicity. History first - and always. Did ethnic cleansing begin in 1964 when Greek Cypriot gangs, often wearing police uniforms, ran amok and shot or terrified into flight too many Turkish Cypriots? Or did it only begin in 1974 with the invasion? If '64 was the start of chaos (fomented from Athens) then it was the Greek Cypriot side which broke the treaty of guarantee that gave Cyprus its independence and the legitimacy of the government of Cyprus (all Greeks, no Turks) is flawed (whatever the UN or the international courts say). But if history begins in '74, then the Greek Cypriots are the ethnically cleansed victims and Mr Denktash runs a doomed little charade of an unrecognised and unrecognisable state.  I was here (for the Guardian) in 1964. I have to say that I saw too many dead or dispossessed Turkish   Cypriots to wipe that slate of history squeaky clean. I can understand the north's muck sweat over security - just as I can understand the profound injustice that Greek Cypriots feel about seeing their homes, lands and livelihoods taken away one night at the point of a Turkish bayonet. With 35,000 Turkish mainland troops still on site, security sweat runs two ways.   But when fear turns into bleak constitutionality on lawyers' lips, hell freezes over. The one thing Greek Cypriots won't negotiate is their international legitimacy as  the government of the island - right down to anything as humble as cutting Turkish Cyprus out of a kids' football tournament. The one thing that Mr Denktash won't countenance is any implied slight to his self-proclaimed status - right down to making the UN troops on the ground use a single checkpoint on the long green line. Goalposts move, but goals, including partition - don't.  Thus principle comes to seem pettily vindictive. Thus cross-border contacts wither as Mr Denktash shuts his saddened citizens away and the people of one small island grow so far apart that they might as well inhabit different planets. Thus Greek Cypriots, in the ignorance of isolation, think the north is a flyblown basket case (which it isn't) - and, while everybody says they want a settlement, the inertia of a realpolitik status quo descends - even on Greeks still striving manfully. Thus the   EU representative here is persona non grata in Turkish Nicosia, because the union accepted the (Greek) government's application.  Confused? Of course. Anyone would be. But the sheer pettifoggery of the dispute sends its own insular message. How does it sit with Greece's buoyant euro economy and move into the European mainstream? How does it suit a Turkey which argued passionately for the right to be an EU candidate - and prevailed? Where does the crucial rapprochement between Athens and Ankara go from here? Down the drain in October, when Nicosia may call on the Greeks to veto Turkey's candidature unless a palatable solution appears on a negotiating timetable? If Brussels reneges (as it may) on Greek Cypriot admission, will Athens then heed the cry to veto all enlargement - from Poland to Hungary - as a wrecking act of brotherly solidarity?  There isn't slow boat to nowhere any longer; only a speedboat heading for the rocks on a coast near us. Cyprus hasn't been settled these past 30 years because there's been no overwhelming imperative to shift. Dust alley by the Ledra Palace is a monument to decisions evaded and half truths limply embraced. But no. No more. The stakes are rising. This - in its bounty, beauty and necessity for reconciliation - is our fine mess now. Summon the blood, for we shall have to sort it out.