Statistics are daunting. Pakistan has had only four elected prime ministers through its 53 years of independence. One was assassinated, one hanged for conspiracy to murder; one lives in exile avoiding corruption charges - and one is a convicted terrorist beginning a life sentence. A record to make the Borgias blush. And yet, of course, that is not quite the whole of the story - for the infamous four come interleaved with long periods of military dictatorship and chaps in braid promising elections of a kind; but not just yet. It is a pretty dismal record for a nation of 150m souls which boasts world class poets, pilots, engineers, doctors - and nuclear scientists. They ought to be able to do better than this. The question now is whether the moment to do better has finally arrived.  Pakistan is world-class, too, in the arts of spin; full of honours graduates from the Alistair Campbell Academy. Thus the sentencing of Nawaz Sharif, the latest in the line of disgraced premiers, is spun as no great shakes. Do ordinary people take to the streets to protest his fate?  On the contrary, as I wandered through the alleyways of Lahore's Anarkali bazaar on sentencing day, the bustle of humanity was utterly normal. Nobody seemed to care that this once supreme son of the Punjab might spend the rest of his natural behind bars. From there, it is only the smallest propaganda stride to seeming enthusiasm for General Pervez Musharraf and his   coup. The army, yet again, has "rescued" Pakistan.  It's a lovely smooth song. But it is also tremendous tosh. Of course the streets aren't alive with a roar of dissent. Why should they be? Nawaz Sharif fought and lost his ultimate battle for power far away from them. This is the dreadful routine as usual. The elected ones depart, the generals take over - and the people have seen it all before. They keep their heads down and just get on with earning a living. They have no faith and precious little interest in a system they can neither influence nor change. But don't confuse indifference with approval - or resignation with enthusiasm.  This time round, though, there is a difference. Something, it is slowly dawning, has changed. Nawaz Sharif will not hang, as Bhutto was hanged by the general he trusted. He will live because a judge - juggling some thinnish evidence and hearing whispers, perhaps, from behind the arras - says that he must. But is the essential judge in this supreme court Mr Justice Clinton?  Let's be brutal about a brutal equation. While Sharif survives, Musharraf can never sleep easy. There can be no easy transitions to real democracy - because real democracy would surely put the latest "chief executive" at risk for his own survival. These gents may drive big Mercedes and wear the smartest of suits: but the essence of the struggle is pure ancient Rome. Et tu Brute?  On this thesis, the merest hint of mercy is weakness and the right of Sharif to live is the beginning of the end for an unimposingly hesitant Gen Musharraf. The former prime minister may, of course, always suffer some fatal mishap in prison. The game is by no means over. But, failing such desperations, consider the wider logic. Whatever he tells a visiting Clinton, the chief executive can never blithely relinquish his grip. The failure to dispose of Sharif, as expected, has already enfeebled him. It signals that he may not be around for too long.  Pakistan, like other pawns in the cold war, is only now beginning to sense how the contexts have been transformed. General Zia could hang Bhutto and reckon that America would keep him safe for Afghan service rendered. Pakistan could cuddle up to Washington as Delhi flirted with Moscow. But none of that works any longer. The only superpower left turns out to be rather keen on democracy (except in spots like China, too touchy to squeeze). It certainly isn't going to spoil that pitch by embracing another Islamabad military coup master.   Where does that leave Musharraf? In no-man's-land. His basic quarrel with Sharif in 1999 was over Kashmir (should the army withdraw, at American prompting, from some captured Indian positions?). He has, unsurprisingly, set a Kashmir settlement at the heart of his foreign policy. The Indians endure so much bloody trouble in the vale. Surely - in the wake of Kosovo and East Timor - the fabled international community will bring them to the negotiating table at last?   A fundamental miscalculation. Who on earth, outside the Pakistan general staff, thinks that Clinton, Blair and the rest will intervene to assist the transference of Kashmir from Indian democracy to Pakistani military dictatorship? The proposition is absurd. Musharraf's perch at the top denies him the prize he seeks most fervently. His continuing presence automatically increases India's influence. These are the policies of the cul-de-sac. The chief executive shuttles round the Islamic world trying to win friends and woo people, but even autocrat democrats like Malaysia's Dr Mahathir see no point in encouraging him. Why hang your hat on such a passing peg?  We may, in sum, have reached a crucial phase in sub-continental history. On the surface, this is governmental shuttlecocking as usual. The braids move in. The venal politicians retreat.   But seizing power is easy in a country in thrall to the army anyway. Plotting a coup is a piece of cake. It is knowing what to do with the power, once seized, that is more difficult.  I should be clear where I stand. I think, 35 years after I first set foot here and fell a little in love with its wonders, that Pakistan is a terrific country of immense potential. The people are - universally - kind and welcoming. The streets are safe; the motorways and ring roads of Lahore - one Sharif legacy - put London to shame. The hunger for education is ravenous.  This is the third world knocking at the door of the first - then, without answer, slinking away again because it can find no ruling stability in freedom to match its dreams. Does it matter that Sharif was a seedy chancer as well as a technocratic visionary? Perhaps in practice - but never in principle. Democracy depends on weathering the lows and well as scaling the heights. Democracy is the stuff for all seasons.  General Musharraf, waking up to his bleak inheritance, may be realising that now: and his international critics, from the White House to the commonwealth secretariat, have a duty to keep spelling it out to him. This time, the traditional army assumptions are caught by a painful new logic. Next time, the elected Pakistani prime minister needs to look forward to a happy old age.