What does it amount to, this "world community" we constantly invoke? The world community that must act/hasn't acted swiftly enough/has shamefully failed to act. And what would I think about it if I'd been stuck up a tree in Mozambique for nine days? The coinage of such community, slipping easily from the lips of politicians who become "world" statesmen when they use it, seems simple enough. Nation shall combine with nation to defend human rights and save human lives - because we are all human beings, locked immutably together on the same planet. But words don't make communities. That's people business. I ran a small, frail, people test this weekend, sampling the headlines on dozens of newspaper websites around the globe. News choices are indicative. They tell you what professional editors (who make a buck, day after day, by providing reportage that sells in their cities and countries) think will turn their paying community of customers on.  A reassuring test - at least at first sight - for Britain. Our serious newspapers, following a vivid TV agenda, have led time and again on the waters engulfing the flat lands along the Limpopo. They are interested in aid and they are interested in finding out how it has flowed. Their readers, meanwhile, are stumping up lots of cash.  Stray a little wider afield, though. The Los Angeles Times is the greatest paper in America's richest state: a land   of swimming pools and helicopter pads. It is excited about gang warfare on 18th Street, sleazy contributions to the Democrats and Jerry Seinfeld buying a $40m home in the Hamptons. It covers the world from Pinochet to Poland's ban on pornography: but Maputo is not high on that list.  Ah! Miami. Another rich city, and one that knows all about floods, storms and natural disasters. Big news for the Miami Herald: the CIA is updating its psychological profile of Fidel Castro, a hungry eel is threatening the everglades and Pinochet is home. (Helicopters do make it on to the frontline - but this is a TV news chopper crashed in Kendall, Florida).  To Europe and Turin, Italy: La Stampa has a controversial death sentence on its hands; a city centre Sunday sees all cars banned; there's a "petrolio record" with "benzina a 2.140 lire"; and 37 Russian soldiers would seem to have died in Chechnya. El Mundo in Madrid has an election poll and Pinochet.  Sydney, Australia? It's gay and lesbian Mardi Gras day for the Morning Herald (and the prime minister is "scratching his head" over dotcom share prices). Toronto, Canada? Some Canadian troops in Kosovo have had a difficult time with "ethnic tension boiling over", as it does. Drug prices may be going up because of a World Trade Organisation ruling.  New Delhi? The Times of India brings you political crises in Patna, a censorship row over the film Elizabeth, a bomb in the Punjab and   confirmation that Bill Clinton will be staying at the Sheraton when he passes through India in a couple of weeks.  Even Africa has other things on its mind. Nairobi's Daily Nation offers bank frauds, runaway Mombasa drug tycoons and Colin McRae's rally car getting stuck at a river crossing, but no wider disasters. "Kenya won't have floods, says forecast".  It is vital, I think, to see what these samplings say - and don't say - about us, all of us.  No moral absolutes. They don't glibly portray a global phalanx of bad samaritans passing by on the other side of the road. There are a few decent stories from Mozambique buried deep in some of the sites. This is not a crude matching of selfishness against compassion, insularity against internationalism. The equation is a damned sight more complicated than that.  Whatever we may conveniently believe, we don't act or think like a world community because no such "community", in any meaningful sense, exists.  Every thought we have about the world, indeed, starts from our immediate surroundings and interests. A bomb in the Punjab matters if   you are a Punjabi reading the Times of India. Readers of the Miami Herald want to know if Fidel's losing his marbles. Utterly natural, inescapable, blameless. Even British concern over Mozambique, on closer examination, operates to the selfsame rhythms. In the beginning there were stretching square miles of water and tens of thousands of destitute human beings huddled on tin roofs or lying along tree branches. But see how the focus shifts.  By Saturday (the lead story in the Times): "Britain's emergency aid programme to Mozambique ran into trouble yesterday when a simmering row between Clare Short and the ministry of defence exploded in public." By Sunday, the Observer has our Whitehall masters "cynically attempting to manipulate public opinion" through double counting aid money - while the Conservatives chunter on about "clumsy efforts to regain the moral high ground".  Bring those strands together in a Sunday Times leader comment. For all the "disaster area" in our own bureaucratic backyard, "Britain can hold its head high in Mozambique". We didn't play "time-wasting diplomacy" like South Africa. We didn't, like France, have a helicopter carrier in the region and do nothing. Our ministers, like Mozambique's own, didn't waste time on "fact-finding" missions.  "Britain should take the lead in finding new ways to react more speedily." London would make an ideal headquarters "for a new   international rescue centre, working with the United States, the UN and the EU". And "action man himself, Paddy Ashdown, would be the ideal candidate to head it".  See how effortlessly, over a few days of mounting tragedy, this "world story" has become just another of those British stories full of bitter cabinet intrigues, dozy foreigners, soundbites from Francis Maude and potential employment prospects for Captain Ashdown. Meanwhile, the South African press is leading on the Pretoria summit coordinating present and future disaster planning between South Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Mozambique - and Britain, strangely, doesn't rate a mention.  News choices, of course, aren't reality: but they are versions of a perceived reality which matters. Television needs pictures. Newspapers have to relate to the lives of their readers. And the only consistent information you can be sure of picking up on a hotel cable TV or from the newsstand in the lobby anywhere in the world is the closing prices in Japan, Frankfurt, Wall Street and points west.  London won't become Rescue HQ International, with Paddy at the helm. Such notions are built on an edifice of British self-perception (and self-importance) which doesn't travel beyond Dover. The misery of Mozambique looks different from country to country and continent to continent. There is no common understanding or reaction. One world? Not without the people who live in it, there isn't.