Tolerance. It's an excellently soothing word; one used almost promiscuously by politicians, leader writers and churchmen intent on spreading a little even-handed balm. For who, pray, seeks an intolerant society? We all need tolerance, oodles of tolerance. But what the hell do we mean by it? The most relevant text, for the moment, flows fresh from the pen of the Chief Rabbi - and inevitably concerns that great test of sexual tolerance called section 28. So Dr Jonathan Sacks climbs gingerly up on the tightrope already swaying under the weight of Cardinal Winning, Archbishop Carey, the editors of the Sun and the Daily Mail, and the boss of Stagecoach buses.  "I can never forget, as a Jew, that homosexuals were sent to Auschwitz just as Jews were. Therefore, if our society has become more tolerant, that is a good thing," says Dr Sacks. So that's all right, then? It wouldn't be a "good thing" to send gays to the gas chamber.  "However" - there is always a however - "the current proposal (to repeal section 28) is based on a fundamental confusion between tolerance and moral judgment. Tolerance means treating with respect people whose positions are fundamentally different from your own. It does not mean regarding those views as equally valid."  Here, essentially, the Chief Rabbi echoes Cantuar. "I condemn totally prejudice against anyone on the basis of sexual orientation. But I also resist placing homosexual relationships on an equal footing with marriage as the proper context for sexual intimacy," in the Carey version. Sacks does not, to be fair, go the Winning way and talk of "perversion" - let alone about an "active and militant lobby" mustering its forces "all over Europe" to threaten "the Christian family". Tolerance has its boundaries.  But now the phone rings. It's one of our daughters and she's pretty upset. She wants to talk about tolerance, too.  We have two daughters. They are identical twins, born 10 minutes apart. Suckled at the same breast, tended side by side in adjacent cots. They grew up together, played together, made friends together. They went to the same schools and achieved the same spread of results in (mostly) the same subjects. They played the same games and sang the same songs. They are, even today, difficult for strangers to tell apart when they dress alike. Two peas from the same pod. Same genes; same everything. One is gay and one is not.  "How interesting!" the occasional   child psychologist will say at the occasional dinner party. It must have been nurture, not nature. Well, perhaps; but don't ask me how that came to pass. They were loved and cherished equally in the most natural sense; brought up without a flicker of difference between them that I can recall. They remain their own best friends.  It is my elder (gay) daughter who calls. She's listening to another radio debate about section 28 and the familiar liberal defences being trotted out there are just so feeble. A "tolerant" society? An excuse for not thinking, for the denial of human identity.  And that, of course, is right when you pause over her distress. Right from where she sits - and right for us, the witnesses who never seem to get called when the tide of purse-lipped toleration starts running again, the parents of gay children we respect and love.  When our twins are home for a family birthday party, what do we say? Do we echo the Chief Rabbi and affirm that one daughter, happily married with a baby, is secure in "moral judgment" because she has not "abandoned a moral code shared by virtually all the world's great religions" - whilst her identical twin, has suffered a "moral confusion" which renders her existence somehow less "valid"? Deserving of "tolerance" but not of equality?  Do we sing along with the Archbishop of Canterbury and "resist placing homosexual relationships on an equal footing with marriage as the proper context for sexual intimacy"? Welcome to the C of E premiership and the depths of its first division. One sister has a loving husband, the other a loving partner. Both are family. What on earth, in the human terms which are the only terms that matter, is George Carey wittering on about? How would he draw his lines in our home at Christmas?   Section 28's language speaks, coldly, for itself. "A local authority shall not (a) intentionally promote homosexuality or publish material with the intention of promoting homosexuality; and (b) promote the teaching in any maintained school of the acceptability of homosexuality as a pretended family relationship."  You can, I'm afraid, hear the likes of Cardinal Winning mouthing such phrases, building them into a bulwark against repeal. "Cast your minds back to the dark days of the second world war," he declaims. "In place of the bombs of 50 years ago, you find yourselves bombarded with images, values and ideas which are utterly alien."  But what is the "promotion" of such values? And what is a "pretended family relationship?" My daughter - troubled and uncertain from the age of 13 on - found nothing to help or to guide her at school: merely an RE teacher the cardinal would have embraced. She did not, to our subsequent chagrin, confide in her parents until her mind was clear.   She had damn all in the way of information, let alone the illusion of town hall propaganda. She was left alone to struggle through the most difficult years.  Where is there the least hint of Christianity in that? When did Christ - abandoning any mention of love - inveigh against "pretended family relationships" (which the Daily Mail, for its own reasons, defines as an "equal alternative to marriage")? Why does it sometimes seem that Robert Mugabe must be the natural leader of this panic-stricken crusade?  The repeal of section 28 won't transform society. There will still be vicious playground bullying of the kind copiously documented by teachers themselves. There will still be prejudice and   fear. Bits of law do not, in themselves, change our world. But the fight, for all that, has a momentous symbolism attached. It forces every one of us to look into ourselves and decide what's right. It allows no political weaselings. No hiding place.  My daughter isn't some notional stereotype invented to scare elderly cardinals. Nor is she a visitor from an alien place. She is like millions more in the world around - and we, in turn, are like millions of other parents. This is our flesh and blood; part of us, a reflection of us. We don't have to say she's equal. She IS equal. And no drizzle of incomprehension, no fear fostered in ignorance, no puny section, can alter that. It isn't tolerance we need. It is knowing what makes our hearts beat.