It is the most sickeningly familiar of tragedies. Peoples of two races and
tongues and religions, living side by side for hundreds of years, are prised
apart in a few bitter months - ethnically cleansed. The heavy artillery from
the North, the sophisticated army run by tough generals, sweeps 200,000
refugees south. The world community protests. And then? 
Then, nothing. This isn't Kosovo, or even Bosnia. This is Cyprus, almost
three decades of misery ago: and the point of remembering the fiasco is that
it is about to come back to haunt us. For Cyprus is not a problem that Nato,
can solve from the outside. Cyprus is a problem within Nato. Closer still,
it is a problem which will blight the next great European project,
enlargement. 
I don't often agree with Conrad Black, the gorgeously combative owner of the
Daily Telegraph. But he's right about the central failure here. "The
European practice of embracing the Turks whenever they need an ally in the
Middle East and spurning them as a rabble of Islamic migrants whenever they
seek a closer association with Europe will lead to disaster," he said
recently. "Europe's insane mistreatment of the Middle East's most important
country, in which the leading European powers hide behind the Greeks, is in
vivid contrast to the whole-hearted generosity of the American and Canadian
extension of their free trade agreement to Mexico." Right again. 
Put the pieces of the Cyprus crisis on the table. Greek Cyprus is one of the
six nations chosen in Brussels for fast-track membership of the EU. Turkey,
pavilioned in damp words and lank promises, lingers on a track of its own.
Rattling sabres in familiar fashion, it will not countenance the Greek
Cypriots joining while it is left outside. But Athens, equally, won't
countenance Nicosia being blocked by Turkey. A block there will be - a block
on Estonia, Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovenia and Hungary too. 
Brutal stalemate. Everyone can see it coming. Nobody does anything about it.
We talk about the development of a European foreign policy so that we may
lecture the Israelis or the Japanese or the Brazilians on the folly of their
ways. It is inflated garbage. Europe lacks both the will, and the clout to
meet a challenge gnawing at its own entrails. The failure is abject. Even
Richard Holbrooke recoils from it in horror. 
The root question - a question beyond Cyprus which, in the answering, would
also cut the island's knots - couldn't be simpler or starker. Will Turkey,
one day, find a place within the European Union? If the hindrances to
flowing trade are progressively removed in the meantime, then all the other
pieces fall into place. 
But, whatever the treacle of our words, is that the true situation? Greece,
constructing fundamentalist obstacles by the minute, gets much of the
attention and most of the wrath, but the direst impediment lies closer to
the heart of Europe. Germany has two million Turks doing its menial tasks, a
pipeline of labour it can turn on and off. If the borders of Europe
incorporate Turkey, if the free movement of workers runs from Hamburg to
Ankara, then Germany is full of foreboding. 
For Bonn, this is domestic politics, not foreign policy. Fear and evasion
join ancestral hatreds beneath the comfort blanket of verbiage.
And yet, with a flicker of statesmanship, there are ways forward. Turkey,
acutely conscious of its own abuses of human rights, doesn't ask for the
Moon. It merely wants a stretching process which strengthens the hand of the
European-looking reformers within the country and allows them to define what
Turkey is and where it belongs. 
A new government in Bonn has begun to address the rights of the Turks who
live and work within Germany. There is a growth of realism in Athens, too; a
realisation that a Turkey left in drifting isolation will be a nation left
to its extremist devices - with a Greece, left on the front line, exposed to
constant perils. 
Rauf Denktash, the hoary old leader of Turkish Cyprus, came up with his own
solution the other day. Basically, two confederal states on the island, one
guaranteed by Greece, the other by Turkey - but both available for
simultaneous EU membership. It didn't make much of a splash. It doesn't seem
much of a runner. The Greek Cypriots - like the Greeks - want a federation,
not a confederation. Denktash wants his legitimacy, and the fruits of
division, confirmed for all time. 
But any suggestion is better than none. And what is the 'triumph' of Kosovo
intervention by a beneficent West? Richard Holbrooke has sought to clear the
Serbian forces out of a part of the Yugoslav federation. In their going they
will, gradually, take the 5 per cent of indigenous Serbs with them,
producing an ethnically cleansed, 100 per cent Albanian Kosovo. Is that, a
few steps down the track, another miserable little independent state? Or
greater Albania? Or part of an Albanian confederation?
Such triumphs are too glib. They are wonders of humanity and resolution
because they impose solutions on others, which we hail because they involve
us in no fundamental sacrifice. They are conflicts which the US, from far
away, may be allowed to settle. The crisis of Turkey, and thus of Cyprus,
demands more than that. It means honesty when the Foreign Ministers meet in
Brussels. It means sacrifice in terms of European jobs and European benefits
and European migration. It means that the Greek Cypriots must acknowledge a
past loss which can never be restored, and that the forces for stability
within Turkey must lay their own vicious ghosts. It means that if Europe is,
indeed, what its founders claim, the maker and keeper of the peace, then
here is the next challenge, lying in wait. 
So what happens next? The cynics, as ever, have the best immediate tunes.
Nothing happens until, a year or two on, enlargement stalls in intractable
anger and we find impasse pottering into gunfire again. Then, maybe, Mr
Holbrooke will be back again; then the government lately moved to Berlin
will wring its hands; then Mr Cook will have his ethics at the ready. This
isn't a little local difficulty. It is gridlock waiting to grip. It is the
destruction of a European illusion. Do we have to wait for desperation
before it fills our red boxes with bile?