There'll be clever ones (JK Rowling) and pretty ones (Kate Moss), rich ones (JK Rowling) and charity-minded ones (er, JK Rowling). At her lunch to celebrate "the excellence of women", the Queen is leaving no professional field untrammelled ... unless you count the field of men. For the first time in royal entertaining history, the guest list is entirely female. As a gesture of celebration, it's a bit like holding Crufts and only inviting the dogs. Which isn't to say that, without leads or owners, these excellent women are going to try to hump each other.  Naturally, the palace has been slow off the mark in this respect: other institutions have been holding segregated events for years. Women in journalism; women MPs; women MPs and journalists, where they all get together in an inspiringly unmacho way, roundly don't slag each other off, unleash no dick-waving competitiveness and therefore necessitate the tapping into no old boys' network.  In an ideal world, men would be complaining about this, the way women complain when some cricket club upholds its inalienable right to let women into only certain rooms and then only when they're wearing navy. I'm beginning to divine misogyny from the collective failure of men to complain. It's as if they've decided that, while our exclusive gatherings may be prejudiced and based on ideas of division that are unsustainable in the modern workplace, well, sod it, whatever we're talking about can't be all that important.  Still, it's worth wondering whether there is anything valuable or even defensible in excluding men at professional and/or state level, even if the men aren't bothered. Who benefits? What conversations could possibly occur with men absent that could not occur otherwise? I won't pretend to explore this from personal experience. I've never been to an all-female party in my life. In the words of Rachel from Friends: "What, you invited her to a party with no booze and no men? And she didn't come?"  If we contend, as most of us do, that there is no material difference in the way women and men approach work, then the only feature specific to us, as a gender, would be discrimination against us on the basis of gender. Were this topic to occupy any gathering exclusively, things would get pretty tart and whiny. Besides, the place to complain about discrimination is in front of the   people who discriminate. Shooing them out and then griping about them is kind of passive aggressive.  On the other, equally valid, hand, there are still women who see the genders as discrete to the point of being opposed, and the workplace as a battleground whose nature will be determined by whichever gender proves itself the nicest and best at stuff.  This school of thought, whose headmistress is Tessa Jowell, would have considerable use for an all-female gathering, on a socio-professional basis. They could talk about how silly men are and how cooperation will always win the day. They could opine on the subject of macho culture, as Estelle Morris did on the Today programme, concluding that "people, on the whole, don't want to listen to someone who's shouting or having an argument". At some point, someone would have to explain to them the point of Socrates and EastEnders, but it would be non-adversarial and over petits fours.  I can't help thinking it's a mistake. Once you start characterising faults in the political or any other landscape as deriving from "men being men", you open the door to flaws that could be characterised as quintessentially female. I can't think of any off hand, but I'm sure someone will and it'll be really annoying.  Otherwise, what function could conceivably be served by these functions? What does a room full of female excellence do - congratulate itself on the superlative excellence of its components? Is this a networking thing? Do we need to be able to identify one another as fellow(ess) females, in order to do each other favours later on? Isn't this incredibly insulting?  It's insulting to women, since it works on the assumption that we're a beleaguered minority when we're not. It's insulting to men, since it works on the idea that we demand unfettered parity and inclusiveness, except when we don't feel like it and would rather have a scented candle. I can even dredge up some umbrage on behalf of genuinely beleaguered minorities, who battled real adversity to reach excellence.  These huffy, boys-are-stupid-throw-rocks-at-them events are not about empowerment, they're about reinforcing an anachronistic culture of women as victims who need to stick together. The whole thing undermines the real progress of working women. Even if it is only lunch. And Kate Moss probably won't eat it.