Did she have an affair with David Beckham? In her forthcoming book, will she tell us what he was like in the sack? Well, course not - Jordan is all mouth, no trousers and, while we're here, not much in the way of blouse either. She's widely tipped as the next winner of I'm a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here, which has sparked her sudden rehabilitation in the minds of all self-respecting post-feminists everywhere. To define the term, first of all: post-feminism is a broad church, taking in love for Jordan, full and unashamed comprehension of the creed of Atkins, and a post-ironic (whatever that means ...) appreciation of posh girls going to pole-dancing lessons instead of pilates. If it's difficult to thread together a worldview from these basically unconnected notions, just think "What would Clare Short say?" and then say the opposite.  Jordan, little though she knows it, being otherwise engaged eating eyeballs and whatnot, has been reinvented as the quintessential female role model in the space of about six and a half days. Her qualities are, apparently, as follows: yes, she has had a number of boob jobs, but we've got her all wrong. She hasn't mutilated herself because she's slavishly in thrall to male notions of the female ideal; oh no. She's just got her eye on the main chance, wants to make a packet, and what kind of humourless, probably flat-chested, old bag would object to that?  Furthermore, she is not, as originally supposed, an idiot. All her decisions have been incredibly canny - she plays public opinion like a zither, with bolshie humour, a comic parody of spoiltness and, above all, steady, drip-by-drip revelations of sexual nature. Deborah Orr, in the Independent on Sunday, noted that "she has dopey Peter Andre eating out of her hand". While the men slither about in an oil-slick of lust and rage (Andre and Johnny Rotten respectively), she sees them for the silly boys they are.  And guess what, people? She's not even a slapper: she makes men wait a full month before she condescends to have sex, which brought forth Liz Hoggard's admiration in the Observer for how "surprisingly moral" she is. That really rams home what astonishingly old-fashioned, misogynist, pursed-lipped, ghoulish nonsense this is, dressed up as 21st-century sass.   The first mistake is one of logic. People mistake the old-school feminist disapproval of boob-jobs for disapproval, and/or hatred, of the women who have the boob-jobs. This isn't true: feminism is not anti-tit, nor has it ever been in the business of singling out good-time girls to pillory for their failures of sisterhood.  It's not even ultimately opposed to the genders objectifying one another's sexual characteristics since, for God's sake, it makes just as much sense to be opposed to people finding each other attractive. All it says is that, if women are to be lauded, above all other traits, for physical features that can only be achieved surgically, then a) that really does make us a kind of lower species, with a built-in obsolescence that occurs well before our actual death; and b) if it's all about silicone, then it isn't really about sex, it's more about fostering feelings of inadequacy in women, with the long game of undermining their self-determination and independence. Neither of those things is cool. That is not to say any school of women's liberation would ever dislike Jordan as a person, but it is to say, she is no role model. Don't be daft.  On the same tip, nobody ever said Jordan wasn't canny - she talks a good game and ultimately uses her sexuality to her own consummate advantage. But, again, the objection to this is cultural, not personal. Women levied advantage via their bodies when they were given neither credit for intellectual muscle, nor access to financial independence. To see people harking back to this behavioural model as an amusing or intelligent way to carry on is - no offence, Jordan - unbelievably demoralising.  It puts women squarely in second place, and this is starkly visible in the busty celebrity's behaviour. She's constantly calling into public debate the trouser-package of her former lovers. This is bitter and ungenerous talk. It is not the register of one equal talking about another; it is that of the angry underdog, a position which women cannot possibly aspire to, regardless of how much cash and attention accompanies it.  As for the morality, or otherwise, of her "make 'em wait, make 'em beg" dating strategy, oh come on. Haven't we done all this guff, where women, being lukewarm about sex themselves, act as gatekeepers to nooky and thereby claw back some scant power and influence? Haven't we looked this schema - where girls are whores and men are studs - up and down and decided it was unrelenting rubbish? That it undermined female sexuality and acted as a bar not just to parity but to meaningful affection between the genders? Didn't we do all that years ago?  Anyway, I repeat - no offence, Jordan. I hope you win. I hope you don't have to eat any more bugs. But role model? Next they'll be telling us that Stepford is actually quite nice at this time of year.