Abstinence is a very American phenomenon and it always makes news over here - not in terms of shopping, or food, or oil or anything else the abstention from which might do the world any kind of favour. No, we're talking about abstinence from sex, specifically teenage sex, which is, coincidentally, the only perpetually renewable resource known to mankind. The onslaught on teenage sexuality is twofold. There are the evangelical roadshows that preach abstinence till marriage. These are full of Billy Graham-style hysteria from excitable girls; but attendance is not mandatory, so even though they receive government grants, they constitute no violation of the constitutional (though not popular) law against including religious beliefs in the public school system. Abstinence training in schools is subtly different - because of that law, many of the programmes don't even mention marriage, they just say "wait". (I once asked Andrew Doniger, director of health in Rochester, New York state, how long people were supposed to wait. He said: "We don't specify, we just say 'wait'." I said: "What, you just take the time you want to have sex, add an unspecified amount of time, and then have sex? He said: "You're a pain in the ass, you know that?")  Other programmes have a Judeo-Christian overtone but, being unable to make any concrete statements, they concentrate instead on the rather nebulous idea that it's nice to be "clean" on one's wedding night, painting virginity as a nice gift to bestow. This business predates Bush by 20 years but, predictably enough, he's always been a doughty believer. In 1996, when he was governor of Texas, his state had the largest abstinence budget nationwide, which he justified with the declaration: "Abstinence is not about saying no. It's about saying yes to a healthier, happier future." Funding for just-say-no campaigns now outstrips that for safe-sex campaigns almost threefold.  There are, needless to say, a lot of things wrong with this. First, many of the campaigns are absurdly scaremongering, which puts the wind up teens who inevitably do have sex and makes them less likely to seek medical help for treatable conditions. Second, most of the dumb slogans (like "If you don't aim to please, don't aim to tease") put the onus on girls to act as gatekeepers to sexual experience, which is misogynistic. Third, the overwhelming emphasis on teenage pregnancy expressly excludes homosexuals from the debate (at a conference organised by the rightwing Medical Institute of Sexual Health, in 2000, a young female doctor was asked how she would apply the abstinence message to a young homosexual coming into her clinic. She said: "I would tell him that he was sinning against my Lord!").  Over here, things are very different: the latest literature on the matter is entitled Just say no - to abstinence campaigns! A substantial part of the budget earmarked for teen sexual health is put towards educating and supporting teenage mothers, so that their predicament need not necessarily create a cycle of poverty. This is treated as a class issue rather than a moral one, and rightly so, since girls from poor backgrounds are 10 times more likely to become teenage mothers than girls from professional ones. This is the definitive comparison in any debate about the role of religion in the political process. Evangelical opinion so often gets liberals' backs up on individualistic issues - homophobia, misogyny, so-called "family values" which castigate the very people (single parents) who are taking the greatest responsibility. In fact, where faith intersects with politics, it is almost always about class and poverty. This is why the "religious right" exists where the "religious left" doesn't - no one ever crusades for the very poor on a biblical ticket.  Politicians draft in faith-based opinion where they want to reframe an issue of underprivilege as one of immorality. The social consequences of iniquity can then be put down to the fact that some people are just born bad (and also, by malign coincidence, born poor). We always take a great deal of interest in American initiatives that are implicitly religious; we view them as an exotic quirk, like French presidents and their mistresses, or Austrians and their fascists. But there is nothing exotic about the way evangelical Christianity, in particular, operates in American society - it is just a predictable functionary of rightwing policy-making.  As Alastair Campbell memorably remarked: over here we don't do God. We don't do God at all. This must be the most valuable distinction still extant between us and America, that we have yet to fall back on bogus concepts of morality to explain why some teens sleep around and shoplift, and some don't. Sorry if that sounds like triumphalism, but, God knows, we don't have much.