No one can complain that we lack warnings. Smallpox, anthrax and dirty bombs for Christmas shoppers have all been trailed, mistakenly, as the next nemesis in town. Now, after Madrid, the  fatwa is unconditional. The country's top policeman says a terrorist attack on London is 'inevitable'. Sir John Stevens has given scary forecasts before. Like Nebuchadnezzar predicting the downfall of Babylon, his fears for public safety are never knowingly undersold. Even so, last week's statement marks a shift. Some of us, any time soon, are going to die at the hands of agents of the network breezily described by Ministers as AQ. What are citizens to make of such portents? Ignore them, say war-watchers modelled on a composite of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Corporal Jones from  Dad's Army. 'Don't panic' is their advice.'  The stiff-upper-lip brigade no longer adds that the only thing to fear is fear itself. The most hackneyed nostrum of the war on terror is also the least relevant. F.D.R. was talking about the Depression, not external threat. 'Plenty is at our doorstep,' he promised America. Now al-Qaeda, the would-be destroyer of that milk and honey, is at ours.Candles are burning at Atocha station, and trains from the suburb where many of the 202 murdered victims lived arrive half-empty. In the lethargy that follows tragedy, observers note stale muzak piped through vacant carriages and no obvious extra security. On the London Tube, complete with heightened scrutiny and safety marshals, nothing seems different either. Passengers swelter in the rush-hour crush, and the signals are still failing at Mile End.  Still, 75 per cent of Britons now feel more vulnerable to terrorist attack than they did a week ago, according to a YouGov poll. Some city-dwellers will go and tend sheep in Argyll, others say they are petrified, but the majority seem calm. This is an odd reaction from a nation that hoards shower gel in petrol strikes, quivers at 'Frankenstein' maize, and thinks, according to three-quarters of parents, that children should be electronically tagged for safety purposes.  Patrick West recently claimed, in a pamphlet for the right-wing think-tank, Civitas, that Britain's extravagant mourning for Princess Diana and Holly and Jessica was 'recreational grief'. Maybe we also suffer from recreational fear. If Sars, MMR jabs and nanotechnology aren't enough to tattoo dread on the British soul, there's always the apocalypse on widescreen. BBC 2's drama documentary series, If, is currently spelling out what will happen, should smallpox, obesity or terrorism destroy the country.  Real danger prompts a different mood. As Eric Klinenberg says in the New Statesman, just-built skyscrapers puncture skylines from Shanghai to Chicago in the wake of 9/11, and diners pay $200 a head to eat in the blue glass twin towers of New York's Time Warner complex. Cities are packed by crowds who demonstrate against war or mourn its consequences. The immutability of urban life and landscapes is evidence of citizens' resilience, or their calculations.  The us-next scenario offers odd, bleak consolations. Any attack is likely be too random to warrant altered behaviour and too small to be Hiroshima. Many think, like me, that an unlawful conflict has made the world more perilous, but there is no sense of the helplessness of the Cold War, when rich citizens sunk bunkers in their gardens in case of nuclear holocaust, and poorer ones were told to get under the kitchen table.Some experts, it is true, warn of a chemical strike, delivered a year or two from now, but the authorities do not dwell on that. Both peaceniks and warmongers can offer the bromide of tranquillity, and, for different reasons, both have. Before Madrid, George W. Bush sold the notion of an al-Qaeda so crushed by his onslaught that it could only smash soft targets with crude weapons. His opponents argued it would be a folly to restrict liberties, since 9/11 was unlikely ever to be replicated.  But death is death, however choreographed. Security services and politicians, at a loss to know what's next, are more anxious than they let on about an ectoplasmic enemy. 'How does one kill fear, I wonder?' Joseph Conrad asked. 'How do you shoot a spectre through the heart?' Blair and Bush could tell him. They have killed fear, or at least anaesthetised it, by telling the hopeful and the weary that the war on terror is being won. But even sceptics err towards calm. The muted reaction to 3/11, as compared to 9/11, was partly about adaptability. The unthinkable is the inevitable now.  I visited Northern Ireland often at the height of the Troubles, talking to the bereaved in the rubble of bombed towns. The atmosphere was one of loss, courage and the hope that each new disaster or dead child would be the 'turning point'; the mini-roundabout at which the killers kept going round and back the way they came. No one ever said they were afraid.  Personal valiance may be a mark of a civilised society, but fear is useful, too. Scared voters compel politicians to stop preaching and start listening. In the absence of that pressure, the myth is flourishing that there can be no negotiation with an enemy that loathes democracy. There is plenty of scope. Unpalatably for politicians, it is all, of necessity, one-sided. Nor do any solutions offer immediate help to voters worried about rucksack bombs on the 7.10 from Didcot.  Long term, Europe needs to understand what drives young men to nihilism and mass murder. For now, politicians have to be more humble. Making things better may be hard, but making them worse is simple. Curtailed freedoms and Guantanamo play into al-Qaeda's hands. As for Republicans carping that the Spanish election was a sop to terror, they should consider this paradox.  Al-Qaeda will be casting its virtual vote for Bush, not Kerry. Terrorists want a kick-ass President whose rhetoric and policies nourish jihad and, probably, they will get one. Professor Paul Rogers of Bradford University thinks Osama bin Laden, whose henchmen are being encircled in Pakistan, may be dead or caught in three to six weeks from now. Though such a result would secure Bush's re-election, it would not clinch victory against a diaspora of bin Laden's disciples who might be more content with a martyr than a living figurehead  On the current prospectus, the war on terror is unwinnable. That does not mean that killers will triumph. Terrorists lose in the end, as soon as moderate communities turn against them, but that may take a deal for Palestine, diplomacy in Iran and an international consensus to replace the fractious bickering of the West.Iraq, the testbed of the future, sways in the balance; not a failed state but far from an advert for democratic nation-building either. The shape of the world may hang on what happens next.  This is no moment for the Prime Minister to go into don't-mention-the-war mode, while switching all emphasis to schools and hospitals. Nor is it the time for people to obliterate fear. Politicians react to the drumbeat of anxiety. Sometimes, it's good to be afraid.