Reshaping the world started slowly. Disappointingly so, some thought. You could detect faint chagrin even in newspapers that had opposed war on Iraq but now expected bangs, not whimpers. An inconclusive 'decapitation' of Saddam did not fit the pre-publicity. Where was all this shock and awe? Donald Rumsfeld's primetime pyrotechnics offered the answer, in a spectacle, unimagined and unmissable, of the strong pulverising the weak. But the 14 British servicemen killed in helicopter crashes and the ragged Iraqi conscripts filing to surrender showed that war, even this one, is low on novelty. Modern lords of destruction simply produce a variant of Wilfred Owen's same old story.  Besides, the technical arsenal is only part of the narrative. Well before the microwave bombs and Moabs began their destruction, the emotional ordnance had been deployed. As Tony Blair told the Commons in his impassioned pre-vote speech, Britons can face battle 'with a clear conscience and a strong heart'.  Conscience has become the watchword of this war. Ministers have resigned because of it or stayed for lack of it. Even Hollywood's Oscar hopefuls have instructed their dress designers to go easy on the sequins, out of deference to anyone incinerated in Baghdad.  Like H.L. Mencken, who defined conscience as 'the inner voice that warns us someone may be looking', Mr Blair knows some tenets are malleable. Back-benchers' conviction might even, he hoped, ossify under the Medusa gaze of Mrs Blair. By contrast with those possessing beliefs as shaky as blancmange, Mr Blair's weapons-grade conscience compares favourably with Mr Rumsfeld's Raytheon Paveway bomb, for use when targets are shrouded in haze.  The Prime Minister sliced through the fog of protest in Thursday's broadcast to the nation. All citizens of good conscience would, he implied, now back the war, however deep their misgivings. But the protest goes on. Why would people who see this conflict as perilous and unlawful dump their objections on the threshold of battle? That would concede that the means justify the beginnings, never mind the ends.  The onset of war is not a moment for carping, but nor is it a time to acquiesce to other people's values. There is no reason why war, like church, should impose an awkward reverence on non-communicant visitors. For all Mr Blair's fine qualities, his unshakable sense of rightness should be treated warily. Almost two years have passed since he last invoked conscience as a cudgel. Eritrea burns in drought, Burundi's food aid will dry up in weeks, and Western assistance is paltry. More than ever, Africa is 'a scar on the conscience of the world'.  Mr Blair still cares. There is no doubt about the durability of his conscience. It is practically a Grade I listed monument to principle, as opposed to the Clare Short variety, a wreck in need of total renovation. But the question is how much conscience should have to do with the politics of conflict.  Nothing, according to the Chief Whip, Hilary Armstrong, who tried to suppress dissent to the Afghan war by informing MPs that 'war is not a matter of conscience'. This time round, the bravery of Robin Cook, John Denham and Lord Hunt gave the lie to that, but she was half-correct. From Thomas Aquinas onwards, theologians have debated how the individual compass on what is right should mesh with the democratic process. Sometimes, as Ms Armstrong may have meant, the former must be subjugated to the latter. But Mr Blair has been more radical. In merging credo and policy, he has abolished the distinction altogether.  When objective data is elusive, the French prove more appalling (in fact, more honourable) than predicted and the facts fail to suit the plan, Bush and Blair have fallen back on the guidance of their Christian consciences. Such hunches, though sacred to the individual, may be hardly more definitive than the Sun's astrologer in charting a path through global meltdown.  Such gloom seems mad to those predicting how foolish the anti-war movement will look when the Iraqi people are swiftly liberated and the loss of life is minimal. But only the brutish would want a different outcome and only the nave expect one. You can support the troops, dislike civil disobedience and still stare in dread at Mr Rumsfeld's conflict cabaret.  It may be that by today Saddam is dead. It may also be that he has had no weapons of mass destruction and that, as Hans Blix puts it: 'You have sent 250,000 men to war to find nothing.' Perhaps we shall see the 'catastrophic success' of a war fought in vain. Maybe not. The vital matter, as everyone agrees, is a stable future for the people of Iraq. The means are less clear, given a President with no proven will for nation-building and an alienated Europe, which doesn't see why it should pay.  Still, Mr Bush's vision of a post-Saddam society, to be finished in a year, features 21 new city hospitals, universal maternity care, all infrastructure and economic governance restored, and, no doubt, Starbucks outlets and Gap franchises in every precinct. The all-American deliverers include Halliburton, the company that made Vice-President Cheney wealthy.  As the happy vision of Baghdad Garden Suburb unfolds, Richard Perle, a key adviser to the Pentagon, has been unveiling another architect's sketch, this time of a new world order, established by 'coalitions of the willing'. The UN, says Perle, is dead.  Where do we go from here? Even those who back war on Iraq are working out how to apply the brake on the US war machine or how, if necessary, to pull the communication cord and jump. If America is to be made less bold and less terrifying, as it must be, the momentum for change has to come from within. As Mr Blair's best efforts have shown, international diplomacy has failed and may fail again.  Saddam was always a sideshow. In the absence of bin Laden, there may well be a new demon, possibly Iran, which lacks the conscience required by US hawks and must therefore face the hell prescribed. Success in Iraq may embolden the President to intervene again. War creep, of the sort we are seeing now in Turkey, may force him.  Such prospects demand a more sophisticated conscience, upgraded like weaponry to take account of modern warfare, in which victory offers no guarantee of a benign outcome. Simple clashes of good and evil are for PlayStation generals, not for politicians. Nor, as John Gray argues in his book,  Straw Dogs, is it right to assume that conscience speaks always against cruelty and injustice. Sometimes, it blesses them, as long as the victims can be quietly buried.  That scenario is also possible now, unless the virtuous warmongers of Washington and London give the Iraqis their rebuilt land and fulfil their promise, non-negotiable for all our sakes. The shape of the world in this century may rest on whether America can heal as well as fight. For the raw power unleashed on Baghdad displays a weakness, too. If men of conscience choose to attack like this, think how those devoid of scruple may respond.