Early last Monday evening, Tony Blair hosted a Downing Street reception for teachers. It went well. His guests, including women peace marchers, admired his speech about disabled children. If the television make-up masked a sleep-starved robot lurching recklessly into war, they were too polite to notice. Mr Blair left after 15 minutes, and his wife stayed longer before explaining that she had to give Leo his tea. Once, such domestic cameos exemplified the wish of this Prime Minister always to be in touch with female voters. Not now. In the prelude to conflict, women are the main challenge to his authority.  Before Monday's reception, he had been picking Clare Short shrapnel from his back. His ITV debate with women, screened just afterwards, resembled a pilot for a reality television series, entitled 'I'm a Prime Minister, Get Me Out of Here'. He was ambushed, those close to him suggested, and maybe that's true. Bereaved mothers, plus women who struck spin doctors as a more Spartist sisterhood, are not comfortable interrogators, but they were fair until the end.  A slow handclap by five among 20 questioners may not seem a great assault, compared with, say, unleashing George Bush's latest baby, the 21,000lb Massive Ordnance Air Blast, nicknamed the Mother of All Bombs. But it sounded ugly and discourteous, an echo of female derision delivered long ago.  Remember Mr Blair, fresh from paternity leave, being heckled into silence by the massed hordes of the Women's Institute, a taskforce beside which the 101st Airborne Division looks like a crochet convention. The memory of the Scream ing Eagles of the jam pan consoled those close to Mr Blair.  Both episodes could, they implied, be explained away as unreasonable hysteria by minority groups. But however sour their send-off, the anti-war women spoke for the mainstream. Around 66 per cent, compared with roughly half of all men, oppose war against Iraq, and the unrest increases.  That is unfortunate for a Prime Minister who closed the gender gap that put Heath, Thatcher and Major into office. Once the female ballot was so blue that, if women had never been enfranchised, Labour would have had an unbroken run of power since 1945. Worcester Woman and William Hague's Pebbledash People learned to love Tony, even through the hiccups. The  Financial Times complained that his hairdo looked flat. A survey claimed that 61 per cent of young adults (thus excluding Mrs Pebbledash) would rather sleep with Hague.  Women kept faith with Blair, but the bond was frailer than it looked. In March 2000, focus groups isolated a new gender chasm showing that 16 per cent more women than men were dissatisfied with the Government. If disquiet translated into votes, Blair's support would slip by a million. Women had not liked the stitch-up of lone parents. They felt their issues unaddressed. When childcare is so shocking, public services so poor and good schools rare, they still do.  Even so, the home agenda has not turned women dangerously against Labour. But nor, in the Prime Minister's case, are they with Mae West, who liked 'two kinds of men, domestic and foreign'. In policy terms, it is the foreign aspect of Blair that appals so many. The simplistic reason is that women just hate war. It's macho, people point out constantly, as if pre-emptive and unlawful attack is the equivalent of bad tattoos or lap-dancing.  But women, custodians of the future, fight too, for good or ill. Combatants range from Joan of Arc to the IRA and a third of today's Tamil Tigers. Then there were the rocking-chair warriors, basking in vicarious glory and chastised from the First World War trenches by Siegfried Sassoon. 'You love us when we're heroes, home on leave, or wounded in a mentionable place.'  The fact that women and children suffer the worst from war does not locate pacifism in the female DNA. The 'Hildabeasts' who kept their Oxford college single sex and the recently identified pushy mothers who, like Donald Rumsfeld, do not do sensitive, have some frail link to Arab women operating in the battle zone described by the Egyptian writer, Ahdaf Soueif. 'Now, simply trying to hold on to our world is a political action,' she wrote last week.  Many of the women Blair met on ITV were also clinging on. 'I can't imagine other mothers going through what I do,' said one who had lost a child to war. It is there, in the realm of the imagination, that women part company with the Prime Minister. In a globalised world, we have never been more intimate with those we may kill, nor so remote.  Satellite communication will serve up few soul-rending images. This war will be uniquely chronicled, yet those whom it destroys will die invisibly. The vacuum of a virtual war is where fantasy takes hold. Mr Blair dreams of a clinical coup of getting rid of Saddam. But 48,000 to 260,000 will perish in weeks, according to one medical charity. For women, those statistics are the bone and blood of other people's children, or their own, sacrificed to the imperative of pride and folly.  Why kill them now? Why kill them at all if containment can go on? For liberation and a better future, Blair says. But Iraqi women and children have been dying for years, from homegrown torture and foreign sanctions, and hardly any one noticed. To squander more lives as a down-payment on ephemeral salvation strikes other women as dangerous beyond imagining.  How odd that this Prime Minister patented feminised politics. The niceness of Blair was never fake, but the emotional rhetoric sounds hollow now. The lands of the living and the dead were bridged by love, he claimed after 11 September. But the axis of evil (expanded to accommodate M. Chirac) demanded a tougher persona, pitched between religious portent and the Royal Courts of Justice. The resulting hybrid, Ezekiel QC, has unnerved women with his messianic overtones.  Then there is the illogic; the twisted truths; the realisation that weapons inspectors were only speed bumps on the road to war. The claim that women learn better conflict resolution through negotiating scrambled egg down toddlers' throats is patronising. Instead, they see a war based on the bogus premise of al-Qaeda's Iraqi links and built on all the tottering non sequiturs that followed. They have tried to say so and found that the Prime Minister is not for listening.  But nor is he the prince of recklessness. Where Thatcher drove a Challenger tank, and Saddam is painted astride a white charger, Blair remains a people carrier man, possessing a warlord's obduracy without the arrogance. To be so heartfelt, and so unjustified, demands a response beyond fury.  Women, slow hand-clappers apart, imagine his horror in watching the second UN resolution, his figleaf and fetish, wither. But why, they wonder, dare he still believe himself a reshaper of the world, when even his allies will not bend to his vision? Maybe Blair will emerge triumphant, but that will not satisfy many women who voted him in. Their courtesy and sympathy are on offer. Their forgiveness, if he cannot back down, is forfeit.