Innocence is dead. So are Mark Gajardo, Jonathan Ellwood and some 35 other Britons, mostly young, who went dancing in the Sari Club and did not come back. The bereaved cry in the streets of Bali, the likely death toll edges towards 200, charred bodies stack up in imported refrigerators and we are called upon, bizarrely, to mourn an abstraction. Australia has lost its innocence, the headlines repeat, and so has Bali. What does that mean? Both places, though in the main benign, are hardly without flaw. Australia has a record of treating asylum-seekers with a harshness bordering on racism, and Bali was never quite the paradise it seemed. Witch-hunters burned down part of a village two years ago, around the time that police stepped up their guard on ports and bus stations amid rumours of mysterious provocateurs infiltrating the island.  There is no Lonely Planet guide to virtue; no geography of goodness. So why, when the truly innocent die monstrously, are we supposed to weep for the places that bred or welcomed them? Partly because the evolving manual of terrorist etiquette demands such a genuflection.  In an interview last week, the novelist Philip Roth challenged the constant assertion that America lost its innocence on 11 September. It was baffling, he suggested, that a country so stained by a history of slavery and brutal segregation should dare think itself a model of purity. Maybe. In the new world polarity of good versus evil, even averagely humanitarian nations can lay claim to some moral Everest. But virtue is not the only issue.  William Blake's theory that 'Innocence dwells with Wisdom, but never with Ignorance' also fits with what happened last week. The Bali bombing, supposedly an obituary to lost innocence, was actually a birth notice for the new age of ignorance.  One year on from 11 September, the list of what we do not know is terrifying. Al-Qaeda, more powerful than ever, has reconstituted and flourished. 'They're coming after us,' says George Tenet, the director of the CIA. Up until now, his organisation has, disturbingly, offered a less precise early warning system than Michel Houellebecq, whose novel, Platform, foretells a fundamentalist group blowing up westerners seeking sun and decadence in an unnamed Far Eastern island holiday resort.  And even now, as Bali grieves, and as shoppers and bus passengers get blown up in two attacks on the Philippines, Tenet can supply no conclusive proof of how al-Qaeda is involved in the latest plague of killings, or even what the organisation is. Maybe, in Indonesia, it's a convenient pseudonym for local fanatics that the government failed to deal with. Maybe it's a global franchise, the Nike of terrorism, whose brand grows as familiar as a swoosh logo on running shoes.  In the face of such an elusive foe, logic is the first casualty. America lines up for war against Iraq, which doesn't have nuclear weapons, but not against North Korea, which does. In Washington, a lone sniper killing, tauntingly, almost on the doorstep of the White House is a symbol both of how impotent the US is to deliver the safety of the world and of how little that failure may sometimes trouble it: the press coverage of Bali, which claimed only two US lives, is   drowned out by reports on the serial shooter, with his Tarot calling card, marked 'Dear Policeman, I Am God.' In the absence of other clues, US newspapers speculate on which deity this monster worships. Is he Son of Sam II, or a child of Osama; a homegrown slaughterer or an Islamist functionary?  In America's clash of civilisations, the worlds of al-Qaeda and Thomas Harris collide. Thousands die in Manhattan, individuals are picked off in Montgomery County, and the lambs are always silent. In Bali, death is messier. Mourners sickened by blood and angered by bureaucracy grow strident. The fate of those they loved has been packaged by the media as the sequel to 9/11, but this atrocity is different.  The aftermath of the Twin Towers attack was a demonstration of the glory of the human spirit or, for those who take Roth's line, an orgy of national narcissism. Either way, the assault, by virtue of its magnitude, was a sanitised apocalypse in which the reality of dying violently was imagined but never seen by those who watched human bodies, as small as insects on a television screen, floating down past skyscraper windows to their bloodless death.  George Bush's ensuing war on terror belonged, correspondingly, in a virtual combat zone, where the enemy is miasmic, the battleground imprecise and the human sacrifice presented as less awful than it is. Few soldiers of the western alliance died in Afghanistan, and, when villages were crushed in error, there was rarely a media witness to log the reality of what happens when clinical combat goes awry.  All that changed in Bali, where murder, stripped of any distancing techniques or soothing narrative, looked squalid, raw and brutal. The stories of tourists' agony invited horror but also unease about a western world that tells potential holiday-makers to stay away from Indonesia while declining to help the only victims forced to remain in Bali. Doctors treating local burns victims in hospitals short of painkillers, bandages, blood and expertise are forced to pin up   notices begging the international community to pay for airlifts for the gravely injured.  This is death unplugged; ugly, divisive, pointless. Expect such scenes to happen soon again, if George Bush attempts to bomb Iraq back to a state of grace. Watch the reprise in whatever discotheque or school, from Manila to Manchester, that al-Qaeda chooses to target next.  What remedies are there for America and Europe? Not to do nothing. As Martin Luther King said, if the lion lies down with the lamb, the latter must be replaced frequently. But worse than inaction is to do the wrong thing because it looks easier. So send the weapons inspectors back to Baghdad. Crack down on the Saudi bankrollers funding al-Qaeda, even at the risk of destabilising the ruling House of Saud.  Accept that there will be no solution to Muslim extremism short of a settlement for Palestine. Stop stoking up the flashpoints of the future, especially in Pakistan, where George Bush's collusion with a biddable dictator looks increasingly dangerous. Believe that debt, poverty and inequality are part of the terrain in which fury and despair take root.  Ignore the patronising argument that the Muslim world has only itself to blame for any ill fortune if it chooses to spurn the chalice of the globalised dream. Stop pretending that people must perish in the name of peace when they are being killed for oil.  And realise there is only so much that enlightened self-interest can accomplish. Even if every item on this shopping list were ticked off, there would be no guarantee against another Bali. But half of South-East Asia is now designated a danger zone. The world is officially more perilous than it was last week. When terrorists grow so powerful, the agents of sanity have no option but to reclaim innocence.   <B>