At 1.46pm on Wednesday, Britain will observe one minute's silence for the 3,000 people who died in al-Qaeda's attacks on America. The pause, on the anniversary of the moment the first plane hit the World Trade Centre, may mark another Dianalia of public sorrow. Bouquets, teddy bears and children's drawings might stack up again in Grosvenor Square, opposite the US embassy. But it seems doubtful. The reaction of a nation always draping itself in borrowed grief has so far been proportionate, muted even. Those who mourn relatives and friends do so privately. For the rest, the event that was going to change everything has, superficially, altered nothing much.  Even in America, the first comforters were discarded long ago. Churches have emptied, the Koran no longer tops best-seller lists and stories of a baby boom and the trauma-induced phenomenon of 'terror sex' have expired. No one queues for gas masks now. But nor have the post-disaster predictions of a slump come true. Although the world economy falters, US consumers have carried on spending and so, in contrast with the rest of Europe, have British ones.  The sight of the Twin Towers collapsing, burned into minds like the Zapruder film of JFK's assassination, has not subdued our taste in architecture. Last week's report by the Commons Urban Affairs sub-committee condemned random skyscrapers but urged, on aesthetic grounds, the expansion of mini-Manhattans, such as Canary Wharf and Croydon.  Fears that no one would ever fly again have given way to complaints that people are more airborne than the average pigeon. Environmentalists worry about the boom in low-cost airlines, and residents oppose plans to asphalt over nature reserves for runways. Passengers once glad to stand in line grow fretful as officials frisk grandmas' bags for tweezers. Anxiety still flickers every time a newspaper reports some airport security breach or outlines plans to make new shopping malls impervious to suicide bombers, but the public mood is oddly sanguine.  Accounts of survivors' experiences seem, a year on, somehow distant. Perhaps recycled images sealed in the limbo between memory and history are so familiar that they have become less shocking. Or maybe people, grateful that there has been, as yet, no follow-up, don't wish to remember more than they must, especially when ordinary life seems so unaffected.  That delusion ended last week, in a report revealing that Britain is now the world leader in spying on its citizens. According to Privacy International, the UK is pathologically antagonistic to private life. True, we don't yet have identity cards, but new laws allow the authorities to tap emails, mobile phone calls and internet traffic without the need, enshrined in most other legislatures, for a judicial warrant. Britain, the authors say, has sacrificed traditional rights to anonymity and free speech with 'staggering speed'.  Then there is the Government's emergency anti-terrorism legislation, compiled as if the Wehrmacht were bowling across the Channel. Already the courts have ruled unlawful its provision that foreign suspects can be detained without trial while British ones cannot. In America, the demolition of habeas corpus has been more draconian, for the 1,200 people secretly arrested in the last year and for the detainees at Guantanamo Bay, kept in a legal no-man's land without either prisoner-of-war status or internationally recognised rights of criminal suspects.  As the balance of freedom and safety tilts, there is another, less explored tension - between security and insecurity. Around £400 million a year is spent expanding CCTV cameras monitoring British public spaces, the security agencies are mushrooming, and the police have an extra £87m to fight terrorism. Yet, irrespective of any al-Qaeda threat, people have rarely felt less safe.  Big Brother has Britain in his cross hairs and still, from under a web of security cameras, children get scooped from the streets and murdered. The absurd crisis, in which schools were closed because the Criminal Records Bureau couldn't vet teachers fast enough, was a kneejerk response to Soham but also part of a subliminal and wider fear.   There is now a state-led demand for omnivision. When knowledge fails, political bluster aims both to soothe and scare. Everything, however private or trivial, must be scrutinised and cleared, from an internet grocery order to a geography teacher's unpaid parking tickets. Inevitably, the must-see phobia spreads. Not sure where your kids are? Get a microchip put in their arms. Can't decide what is verifiable and what is fantasy? Go for the reassuring fix of reality TV, shorn of any doubt beyond whether Darren really had to put his hand down Tara's knickers on  I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!   If knowledge, as Francis Bacon said, is power, then the global batteries are flat. In the war on terror, bereft of facts and low on certainties, political weakness gets masked by machismo posturing. 11 September rolls round again, insurrection stirs in Afghanistan, war in Iraq looks inescapable and the only certainty is that 'crawfish', a real verb after all, is Texan for switching position.  Saddam is not the only exponent of the art, in a year where nothing has stayed still. Not Osama bin Laden, or the disobliging tribes of al-Qaeda, gone from the Tora Bora caves, if they were ever there, before the forces of civilisation could find or rout them. The truth is as elusive as the enemy. Kerim Chatty, a gun-carrying Swede, might have been going to crash a plane into a US embassy, but no one could say for sure. Those who may have been innocent of al-Qaeda links have been held without trial by the same authorities that bestowed on Mohammed Atta, prime executioner of the attack, a warm welcome and an immigration visa.  George Bush's men have X-rayed the body of world terror and failed, so far, to isolate a single bone. This is unfortunate but not surprising. Terrorism is a miasmic target and intelligence is imperfect. It is easy to be wise after the event and almost impossible to be wise before it.  Using 11 September as an excuse to wage war on Iraq, a state with no known al-Qaeda links is a non sequitur so glaring that it is hard, like Alice in the case of the stolen tarts, to find an atom of meaning in it. Nor do we know the contents of Saddam's arsenal or of Mr Blair's dossier, a document as slow to turn up as Mr Micawber's windfall and possibly as insubstantial.  All we can be sure of is the President's and Prime Minister's own certitude. Mr Blair is not for crawfishing. Such implacability fails to acknowledge how people have altered. Citizens may not yet have realised that the authorities are undermining the very liberties they aspire to protect, but they have learned how to be afraid.  Some terrors, of killer dinner ladies or paedophile predators, are absurd or exaggerated. Others are justified. Ignorance about the enemies we face has made people nervous, understandably, but also more bold. They don't want to buy into official paranoia and unsubstantiated rumour. They don't want a sideshow war, unjust and perilous. They know now, as Mr Bush and Mr Blair seem not to, that bravado is never a substitute for wisdom.