Steve Bing 'Laden' is the latest tabloid villain. 'He is the biggest bounder on the face of the earth,' says the  Mirror, which awards him five rodent symbols. Since Henry VIII and Lord Archer scored only four rats apiece, you can imagine the badness of Mr Bing. His former partner, Elizabeth Hurley, claims he is the father of her unborn baby. He thinks she is mistaken. This bizarre debate has made the media viciously critical. Compared with Mr Bing, Sir Jasperish types who shackle virgins to railway lines look like alumni of the Duke of Edinburgh's Award scheme. Why is the press so angry? A recurring ingredient in the coverage is the villain's nationality. Mr Bing is an American. The xenophobia theory sounds, at first, preposterous. On Tuesday, three months will have passed since the World Trade Centre massacre. At 8.46am Eastern Standard Time, the moment the first plane struck its target, the 'Star Spangled Banner' will ring out in US enclaves from Ground Zero to the space shuttle. The Taliban are crushed. Hamid Karzai, a Pashtun royalist and a man who would not look out of place in a ministerial Rover, heads the interim Afghan administration. It is possible that, by this morning, Mullah Omar and even Osama bin Laden are facing what Donald Rumsfeld euphemistically calls justice.  As he watched television pictures of the first plane hitting the twin towers, George W. Bush, assuming a navigational error, said: 'There's one terrible pilot.' Confessing to this vapid initial reaction signals justified confidence in   what he has achieved since. Barring a bloodbath at Kandahar or elsewhere, Bush will be thankful as the anniversary passes. If ever there was a moment for God and all upstanding citizens to bless America, this is it. And yet, over the past three months, anti-US sentiment has incubated and multiplied. The grudges go wide, but the two main charges are aggression and protectionism.  The playwright Ariel Dorfman offers the neatest plotline for old hatreds. On 11 September 1973, Salvador Allende, the democratically elected Chilean president, was overthrown in a coup backed by America. Although the crushing of Manhattan andSantiago supply an obvious symmetry, adventurism stretching from Cambodia to Cuba also informs the view that the US had it coming. Then there are the sins of omission - the Kyoto protocol never embraced, the fruits of globalisation never shared, the property rights of pharmaceutical companies never challenged (until the issue switched from Aids in Africa to anthrax in Washington).  Who reveiles America? Not Charles Clarke, although he admits that he used to, in a previous, Dave Spartish incarnation. That leaves the usual supposed suspects: carping Lefties railing against a US hegemony responsible for evils from the Big Mac global diaspora to Oprah Winfrey. There is a clear distinction between detesting a policy and a people; a fact too obvious to mention, except that advocates of the widest possible war on terrorism consistently undermine critics by branding them phobic to all things American.  Critics of America are not, in any case, drawn exclusively from the pacifist Left. War groupies also grow resentful, not through distaste but through envy for US swagger. The feeling mounts, sometimes subconsciously, among those who scream for Engerlund, in football as in battle, that our forces and politicians are being sidelined. We have been   courted, seduced, promised the Earth, then dumped when it is all too late. Bush and Blair. Bing and Liz. In politics and love, the scoreline says two-nil.  The link between Miss Hurley's pregnancy and Mr Blair's birthing arrangements for the new world order is admittedly tenuous. It is true, however, that relationships between cads and starry-eyed romantics are rarely what they seem. Of Bush and Blair, the President is less compromised. He entered the war on terrorism on a stated mandate of aggression, while Blair envisioned saving 'the starving, the wretched, the dispossessed, the ignorant, those living in want and squalor'. This, as ever, was a postcode lottery exempting Mazar-e-Sharif, where the hundreds of prisoners of Kalai Jangi were butchered.  That the British Government smoothly brushed aside calls by Amnesty and others for an inquiry begged the question of what, if not a potential My Lai for our times, might enrage a prophet of salvation. Blair is a genuine humanitarian, but his pragmatism and lack of power decree a Benthamite line. The routing of the Taliban represents victory against tyranny, but the price is high. Uncounted civilian casualties have paid their tariff. So have the three babies who froze to death in a refugee camp in one night last week. Thousands more will perish soon in no-go zones devoid of aid. Is this for the greater good? We shall soon see.  Beyond the theatre of war, the West believes that 11 September spawned a better, kinder society. Rubbish. Here, a survey claims that young Britons are 'suffering emotional trauma as great as bereavement or divorce'. Tell that to someone whose child died in a hijacked plane. We have   abandoned materialism, say pollsters whose patch cannot include Harrods or Argos in the pre-Christmas scurry.  A transatlantic round robin, from acquaintances in Denver, avoids the usual hints of accruing wealth and counsels 'valuing our dear friends'. But in Washington, Pentagon hotshots tip off only their own dear friends to flee town because of a nuke alert. In New York, families of fire-fighters and other victims argue over how vast compensation packages are parcelled out.  War doesn't reshape people; only the world. After Afghanistan, Planet Terror is modelling clay for hawks scenting action in Mogadishu or Khartoum, in North Korea or Iran. But the first in Bush's cross hairs is Saddam Hussein. Although Blair has distanced himself, Jack Straw has rubber-stamped a supplementary  casus belli by saying that Iraq must re-admit weapons inspectors. Can Blair hold back if Bush goes in? He must.  It is not sacrilage to stand against America, when the future of the world may still depend on caution. Afghanistan is the first virtual war - an instant, foolproof, bloodless recipe, like Delia Smith for bombers.  Any notion that the US can dispense democracy by daisy-cutter, to a schedule and momentum of its choosing, renders the next stage more perilous, not less so. Already the gruesome sideshow of the Middle East disproves the myth of omnipotence. Blame Sharon for his mad intransigence, as more mauled bodies of children from both sides are buried. Blame Arafat for his weakness or duplicity. But they are only trailing Bush's footsteps.  At 8.46am Eastern Standard Time on Tuesday, national anthems will play across the world. Three months will have passed. At a time when most miracles are deemed achievable, it is possible to hope that Blair may yet impress on Bush the first lesson of hubris. Victory is sometimes more dangerous than defeat.