War is not an adventure but a disease. 'It is like typhus,' wrote Saint-Exupery. Aside from (seemingly unrelated) anthrax attacks and the recipe cards for lethal ricin thoughtfully sprinkled around al-Qaeda's Kabul poison kitchens, this battle has been quiet on the bio-front. But warfare itself is contagious and the belligerence bug infects the British press. While assorted sections of the media are always eager to take up arms against the enemies of civilisation, such as pharmaceutical companies, Michael Barrymore house parties, working mothers or Marks &amp; Spencer clothes (hostilities suspended pro tem) all-out, internecine conflict is unusual. This is fortunate. The media's battle of good versus evil is the most fatuous argument since the Swiftian tussle over whether to break into a boiled egg at the big end or the little.  It was the  Sun wot begun it, leading for the big-endians with a denunciation of 'traitors': newspapers and commentators too dim to foresee the rout of Kabul. The triumphalists hadn't predicted it either, let alone noticed the hollow centre of this great victory, but that is beside the point. The  Mirror hit back, branding Osama bin Laden and the  Sun 's editor, David Yelland, as almost indistinguishable (apart, obviously, from several luxuriant yards of hair.) For other commentators, almost universally pro-war, to join in a playground game of 'yah, boo, sucks' is their business. For the Foreign Secretary to do so suggests a certain desperation.  Yet, by Friday, Jack Straw was writing in the Sun, applauding its unswerving support. Lily-livered lefties in the media, including 'the corrupt, disgraced,    morally bankrupt and spivvy  Mirror ' must be fuming, crowed the paper. We are - a bit. If the Foreign Secretary intended to widen the mutant aims of conflict to embrace tabloid circulation wars, he might have told us.  Newspaper dust-ups fill a vacuum in which all-round ignorance as to how Bush's war will play out, in the short or longer term, is in direct proportion to the amount of bogus wisdom flaunted. Lack of information is also what makes the adversarial so angry. Theirs is the difficult role. They can only be right if the war goes well, whereas those who opposed it from the start can welcome any short-term benefit while remaining opposed to this shambolic conflict on assorted grounds: through humanitarian worries; for fear that bungling intervention invites civil war and may destabilise a region and a planet; because international terrorism is so endemic that obliterating Afghanistan is, at best, as useful as a tonsillectomy on a hydra.  Upholders of such views are unlikely to be swayed by burka bonfires or by the capture of bin Laden. As for last week's rout, anti-warmongers were never so nave as to believe that the Steptoe tank force of the Taliban would prevail against daisy-cutters. So now what? The Northern Alliance looks fractured and vicious, but we're always told that we can't choose perfect friends in the new world order. Unfortunately, we can't pick perfect enemies either. Beyond the obligingly skittle-like Taliban lie less tractable dangers.  In such unsure times, the spectacle of hacks berating other hacks would simply be infantile, except that the crowing of some in the pro-war media chimes with a flourishing, brutish thread in British life. A new vein of anti-Muslim racism is percolating through. Though media pugilists might deplore that mood, misplaced triumphalism also has an ugly edge. Those entrenched enough to deride as fools or quislings anyone who questions war may also be more prone to edit events to fit their version.   Look at the children of Kabul, out flying kites in freedom. Forget the fact that we are flouting habeas corpus and mortgaging British liberties against a non-existent state of national emergency. Forget, too, the Afghan children who do not fit the template demanded by the prophets of easy victory. A hundred boys were reportedly massacred at a school in Mazar-e-Sharif, but their death attracted little notice. This, to some sheltered supporters, is PlayStation war, as slick and bloodless as computer-game slaughter.  Paul Rogers, professor of peace studies at Bradford University, believes that many civilians may have died on the Taliban front line - in reality a string of villages - because they were too poor to flee. Few share his worries. Agonising over even the demonstrably dead Afghans bleeding on newspaper front pages does not suit patriotic fervour for this lovely war.  By now, charities would normally be winding down aid programmes as the first snow blocks mountain passes. Three-quarters of the trucking routes into Afghanistan are suspended, looters raid warehouses and Oxfam calls for airdrops of aid to start immediately. Clare Short, conversely, continues to give the impression that urgently delivering and distributing more food is as nutritionally imperative as, say, a third helping of treacle sponge for Nicholas Soames. Enough, she says, has already been shipped in to feed six million. Tony Blair tells Parliament, apparently conflictingly, that the World Food Programme has dispatched more than 50,000 tonnes of supplies since the beginning of October: enough to feed five million people for a month. Given that 7.5 million Afghans face death by starvation any time this winter, government confi dence looks questionable. Who, among the Government's media groupies, will ask those questions?  Of course, some good things have emerged as offshoots of conflict and more still may. Bush and Putin's agreement to cut nuclear weapons would preferably be enshrined in a treaty rather than a cosy chat over a catfish broil, but it is progress. Doha has at last begun smoothing the playing field of trade for the developing world. Gordon Brown's call to the West to double aid to £69 million a year and fund 'a new deal for the global economy' glosses over the fact that Britain's aid budget, at 0.31 per cent of GDP, falls short of the UN target of 0.7 per cent. Even so, it puts flesh on the frail bones of Blair's Utopia.  But new deals won't work unless old causes are eradicated. Forward-looking Islamic states are beginning to realise that they will have to open their economies, emancipate their women and modernise to survive. The option is the fate Saudi Arabia is now staring down. The House of Saud runs the biggest welfare state in the world; not through charity but to suppress the discontent of young, jobless fundamentalists. The social cost of sedating homegrown bin Ladenites is oil at $20 a barrel. If, as predicted, the rate drops to $10, then Saudi, already the crucible of this conflict and the flashpoint of the world, will be increasingly unstable.  Bush must live with less Saudi oil. He will have to remove the hated 5,000 troops whose presence inflames militant clerics far beyond Mecca and Medina. He should lift sanctions against Iran, promote a similar move in Iraq, go for renewables, endorse Kyoto and pray that Pakistan does not implode.  In the shorter term, the cold welcome displayed to the first troops into Bagram may be ominous. Donald Rumsfeld bays, disgustingly, for blood. When Bush's forces of civilisation look so fragile and so feral, it seems unwise for his British henchmen to enshrine themselves as the sole custodians of wisdom and of virtue.