Last Monday morning, Donald Rumsfeld, the US Defence Secretary, stood in the Pentagon and gave a speech declaring war. His target was his own department's red tape. The challenge of cost-cutting, he said, was 'a matter of life and death'. Twenty-four hours later, Rumsfeld surveyed the fate decreed by other reorganisers for his bureaucrats. Under the rubble, some 200 lay murdered. So much for life and death and good housekeeping. So much for war. Worlds change in a shutter's snap and words that made sense one day become ludicrous by the next. We don't care who leads the Tory party or what Tony Blair was going to tell the TUC. It seems unthinkable that the last media sensation was Victoria Beckham's autobiography or that Stella Rimington's memoir shocked anyone. History is not over, as Fukuyama claimed. It remains Voltaire's ' fable convenue '. But who agrees the fable now and what way does the story twist?  The first narrators were office staff pictured walking, in a nursery crocodile, down the stairs of the World Trade Centre, so that emergency workers could pass them. The North Tower was   moments from collapse and the rulebook of disaster etiquette was set. Afterwards, in narcissistic Manhattan, citizens who once trampled beggars to get to the cashpoint queued to give blood and embrace strangers.  Disasters cement civic solidarity. When Pan Am flight 103 hit Lockerbie, the shops and boarding houses opened as normal, as if the indomitable nature of the human spirit could be measured in teabag sales and fried egg breakfasts. In Enniskillen, they boarded up the war memorial, buried their dead and offered, even to the predatory strangers of the press, a kindness burnished rather than corroded by IRA murderers.  Terrorism often breeds magnanimity in its victims. It also forges communities of the imagination, bonded by shared horror. We are all potential victims now, all fingered by bereavement, all experts on al-Qaeda, all depressed. We even understand our children better, as they stare at familiar, PlayStation images of smashed buildings and ask, as we do: 'Is it real?'  'It is dark like snow,' a confused survivor said, and few have described the New York devastation more eloquently. No one can write a script for scenes beyond the remit of language, but maybe Eliot gets the closest:  Industrial lords and petty contractors, all go into the dark,  And dark the Sun and Moon, and the Almanach de Gotha  And the Stock Exchange Gazette, the Directory of Directors,  And we all go with them, into the silent funeral,  Nobody's funeral, for there is no one to bury.'  The pictures of the dead are everywhere now. A victimless tragedy evolves and the tally rises. There will be bagged bodies for the grave, but the wrong ones. The poor are supposed to die or, at a pinch, the petty contractors. But not the industrial lords of the  Stock Exchange Gazette, not the brokers and bankers relaying dying words of love through Wap phones and crushed under citadels of capitalist endeavour. No wonder, when the invulnerable are obliterated in their thousands, that we collect beneath the mantle of shared experience.  Amitai Etzioni, once a guru to Clinton and Blair, said his idea of community 'includes the [American] nation, Europe _ and one day the world'. His imperial plan hardly got beyond the focus groups of Pennsylvania Avenue, maybe because of a sinister subtext to his creed. Community, though imbued with touchy-feely togetherness, holds no moral weight. An inclusive grouping is, de facto, exclusive too. A loose coalition of sorrow spans everyone from those whose children or partners died like cattle to the chorus of public mourners who weep for unknown stockbrokers and dead princesses alike.  And then there are the outsiders. As the Cellophane sheafs of flowers pile up at Roosevelt's plinth, American mosques are defaced with graffiti and attacked in drive-by shootings. Veiled women get abused as they walk their children to nursery school. In Australia, a school bus carrying Muslim children is stoned. In Britain, indiscriminate racial hatred stirs against Muslims and asylum-seekers. As the public pendulum tips uneasily between sorrow and revenge, politicians also plunder the community chest.  Despite the squeezed tears and Forrest Gump rhetoric, George Bush has never played a shrewder game. In a new study on crowd leadership, Dr Steve Reicher, of St Andrew's University, and others study the mesmeric quality of those who, from Hitler to Scargill, knew that the secret of domination is to keep the message simple. Bush wants to 'whup' terrorism and fight a war in the name of his new community; the forces of 'civilisation', deployed on the pristine battleground of good versus evil.  Which is which? Were the Americans righteous when they backed Islamic fundamentalists to break Nasserism? Did Bush's gods smile on the British when they torched Washington in 1814? If simplistic labels are the only kitemarks of virtue, then we must assume that all who shun any Bush plan are dangerously consigned to the ranks of the 'evil' and 'uncivilised'. For clarity, George Bush Senior focused on a single villain, and his son does likewise. But Saddam Hussein survived the Gulf War while his nation's children starved from Western sanctions. Osama bin Laden may also flourish, as millions of Afghanis perish. The only question may be whether winter snow or Nato Tomahawks fall first.  A hideous clamour for retribution builds. In the  New York Times, Thomas Friedman suggests 'the World War III Manhattan project'. Here, Sir Peter de la Billi&egrave;re demands action far beyond the 98 cruise missiles launched by Clinton on the wrong targets. Already, Germany and France are mocked by the right-wing press as appeasers. It is right that the world supports America.  Equally, it is not a sacrilege to the dead to ask that Bush must seek to understand better why his country is reviled, more or less viciously or justly, by opponents ranging from the street dancers of Palestine to those whose agitprop stops at fly-posting Baby Gap. Corporate America on its knees is the vision of madmen. But a day in which 3,600 Starbucks outlets failed to open is also the hazy dream of vegan aromatherapists crusading in the name of the oppressed world.  Perhaps we all need to re-examine who we are and what we want. What we are getting is a display of testosterone politics from a president whose country's tragedy has accorded him an almost divine right of sanction. Blair walks 'shoulder to shoulder' and the public endorses, for now, unquestioning solidarity. Britain and America share the same DNA. Churchill's island race   has rarely been so attuned to the isolationist pride of America. In the face of such sentiment, one can only hope that Blair's public bullishness disguises private caution. The US has never had a clearer mandate for warfare or a hazier notion of how it should use it.  When governments bluster, then citizens grow powerful. Society, as John Stuart Mill said, executes its own mandate for good or evil. If it gets it wrong, it 'practises a tyranny more formidable than many forms of political oppression'. The hawks urge vengeance and in a CNN poll 86 per cent of viewers endorse retaliation. If the public mood hardens into a clamour for a quick hit, then Bush may yet oblige.  But there are other voices. In Manhattan, in the precinct of St Paul's, in City offices, in streets and churches, there is revulsion against death on this majestic scale. The sight of cannon fodder, whether laid out in Army serge or Thomas Pink shirts, provokes a yearning, in the bereaved as in the bystander, that no other innocents, irrespective of race or class or wealth or faith, should ever die like this again.  That does not mean that retaliation is wrong. It does mean that sorrow induces narcolepsy and that we, sleepwalking through grief, may confer on politicians a wisdom they do not have. As the world tilts between reason and insanity, few certainties remain, beyond the fact that a war is being planned in the name of those who long only for peace. Yesterday's horrors haunt us still, but so should tomorrow's. It is time now for logic.