The carnival is deferred. Timothy McVeigh, due to die at 7am Indiana time on Wednesday, gets a 30-day extension. This postponement may inconvenience those concerned, from Gore Vidal, a guest of honour, to the local tattoo parlour selling 'Die, Die, Die' T-shirts to execution tourists converging on Terre Haute penitentiary. Few, however, will be sorrier than McVeigh, devoid of remorse for killing 168 people in the Oklahoma bombing and eager to become the first federal prisoner to be put to death for 40 years. The revelation, late in the day, that the FBI withheld documents from defence lawyers at the trial would have been manna to other condemned men. McVeigh's insouciance has instilled a frisson of worry even in the minds of those who support the evil practice of capital punishment. Killers are supposed to plead, beg and repine, as opposed to wishing, like McVeigh, to expedite the moment when he can recite his last words ('I am the master of my fate; I am the captain of my soul', from Henley's 'Invictus') before being pumped full of sodium pentathol and potassium chloride. The only last ritual is to synchronise the failings of bungling prosecutors with a mass murderer's publicity schedule.  Samuel Johnson, who argued that executions must draw a crowd in order to fulfil their purpose, might have approved a delay that makes the McVeigh killing even bigger box office. Although Entertainment Network has been debarred from supplying a direct feed from a webcam in the execution chamber to pay-per-view subscribers, it is simple to adapt the official film for transmission by internet and cable channels. The result, death as   spectator sport, will be a greater draw at Terre Haute than at Tyburn. Public executions are back.  Whether their revival fulfils Dr Johnson's hopes of deterrence is doubtful. The tapes of Georgia executions, played on US radio recently, are likely to be regarded by audiences weaned on visual violence as too anodyne, not too grisly. But that's America, where 683 prisoners have been executed since the death penalty was resumed in 1977. Eighty five were put to death last year, around 4,000 remain on Death Row, and nowhere is bigger on retributive killing than George W. Bush's Texas. Quantity aside, there is something qualitatively weird about the McVeigh case. He is not simply a martyr-in-waiting for white supremacists or a marketing tool for vegetarian activists urging him to think pacifist and choose bean burritos for his final meal.  A misfit among those (poor blacks who murder whites) the state prefers to kill, he is young, handsome and media-savvy. His Hollywood potential does not diminish the evil of a psychopath who dismissed the 19 children he murdered as 'collateral damage', but it somehow modifies revulsion. How reassuring to think that such distortions afflict only America. Except that the McVeigh show has equal fascination here, despite a vast gulf in opinion on the death penalty. In the US, 67 per cent of the population endorses it. In Britain, the 70 per cent majority who wanted to bring back hanging in the mid-Nineties has slumped to one in four.  That mood should not be interpreted as a brandmark of vengeless and humanitarian instincts. Consider Ronnie Biggs, weeping in his Belmarsh cell after being repatriated by the Sun. The paper's conversion of a dribbling stroke victim to a circus act was, although chilling, less gruesome than the baying from elsewhere.You would expect right-wing complaints that evil Ron was here only to luxuriate in our Champneys-style prisons or to feast on ambrosial egg and mung bean salad, delivered courtesy of Loyd Grossman's revamped menu for our world-beating NHS. The liberal consensus was, scarily, even less merciful. As an Independent leader put it: Biggs 'should die in a prison cell. Any other outcome would be a horrible reward'.  Though once a nasty criminal, Biggs is not a murderer. He can barely walk, has little speech and poses no conceivable threat to the public. However regrettable it is that he spent most of his tariff improving his tan in Ipanema, a civilised society ought to be able to grasp the futility of exacting revenge from a man too addled by impending death to recall exactly where he is or what he is being punished for. Something odd is happening to our capacity for mercy.  As if in tandem with official toughness on crime, public clemency wears thinner. The clamour of those who wanted James Bulger's killers rebrutalised in jail or who sought to canonise Tony Martin, the farmer who shot a teenage burglar, chimed with the mood of a Home Secretary who, though never endorsing the vigilante tendency, offered the vision of a criminal justice system riskily skewed towards victims' wishes. Although Jack Straw ran out of time and failed to introduce the sentencing review planned for last Tuesday, manifesto leaks herald a second term of tougher sentences and a rising prison population.  Tomorrow, the Howard League For Penal Reform will begin its campaign to ask election candidates to oppose such a strategy. We are a bigger jailer than Burma and we are useless at redeeming those we lock up. Such messages are naturally not included in the Labour policy unit briefing paper advising candidates what to tell Howard League canvassers. 'The Government does not believe it would be appropriate to set   targets to reduce [or indeed increase] the prison population,' it begins.  So much for the Lord Chief Justice's warning that overcrowding is 'a cancer'. So much for the protests from the outgoing Chief Inspector of Prisons, Sir David Ramsbotham, on vile conditions and woeful rehabilitation. On a recent inspection, at Stoke Heath in Shropshire, he found 69 remand prisoners, 15- and 16-year-olds found guilty of no crime, locked in their cells. They had no work, no education, no exercise and no amusement, beyond four shared transistor radios; 187 serious assaults on child inmates had been logged in seven months.  In a country inured to horrors, that report raised almost no interest. Even so, Ramsbotham, an embarrassing scourge to his political masters, has been prised out of office in the most discourteous manner possible. In comes Anne Owers, a liberal human-rights expert, whose record sounds ideal until you remember that Ramsbotham, an Army general, and his predecessor, Judge Stephen Tumim, succeeded because they were old Establishment buffers with awkward-squad credentials, fat pensions, stout consciences, little to lose and, therefore, no compunction in telling illiberal Home Secretaries, Tory or Labour, how disgraceful their methods were.  Although the prison policies of David Blunkett, Straw's likely replacement, seem unlikely to be mistaken for those of Elizabeth Fry, he will have to strike a better balance than his predecessor. When around 30 teenagers have committed suicide in young offenders' institutions in the last two years, disgust over America's brutishness should not disguise the fact that there is limited scope for self-congratulation on our own aversion to cruel and unusual punishment. We don't kill people, but, as John Stuart Mill understood, the line between commission and omission is sometimes thin.  Amid the growing revulsion over Timothy McVeigh's execution, it is also worth considering how we treat less monstrous offenders.