Serendipity is the most popular word in the English language, according to a poll conducted by the London Literary Festival. A term redolent of happy chance seems an odd choice for a nation with an anxiety complex the size of Cardiff, the flashpoint for the latest outbreak of mass hysteria. On Tuesday, Warren Moore, drivetime presenter of the radio station, Red Dragon, made a facetious remark hinting at renewed petrol blockades. In normal times, his comment might have registered only with a Welsh hill farmer or two, a few, late-season pony-trekkers and a posse of longhorn sheep. Instead, countrywide queues built up, pumps ran dry, fuel replenishment was put back by a week and the Sun demanded: 'Have we all gone mad?'  Apparently we have. As the phantom scare faded, more details emerged about the previous week's panic-buying. Somerfield, the high-street supermarket chain, reported that its customers did not restrict their shopping sprees to aisle wars over bread and milk. In addition, sales of deodorant, shampoo and shaving foam rose astronomically. Washing powder and cleaning fluids evaporated from the shelves as the public stockpiled against a pristine Armageddon. Had things got a micron more desperate, we would no doubt have been hoarding any mutant turnip left unsquelched by Lord Melchett and his newly-legitimised Greenpeace crop-tramplers.  What to deduce from such irrational behaviour, beyond the fact that the bathroom cabinets of Middle Wallop are now stocked with sufficient anti-perspirant to sanitise every armpit in Mexico City? The social psychologists' explanation is simple. Collective behaviour is the glue of community and therefore a good thing until it is subverted by self-interest. Mass action of the me-first kind flourishes when people lack trust in central authority. Rumour and fear are sparked by lack of faith in official pronouncements.  In an age of doubt and slick communication, the country prefers to take its cue from Wayne of Red Dragon rather than from a Prime Minister whose recent strategy on calming national panic seemed hardly more effective than that of a commuter shouting 'Sarin' on a Tokyo tube. But the drift in public faith is not primarily the fault of Blair, who, for all his vast majority, collected fewer votes in 1997 than Major did in 1992. Voter apathy means, in turn, that the parliamentary spectrum cannot reflect the wishes of the self-disenfranchised, who register their protest through other outlets. Hence what Steve Reicher, editor of the  British Journal of Social Psychology, calls 'a crisis of democratic representation'.  Or, as Martin Luther King put it: 'Crowds are the voice of the oppressed.' Mass movements, even with their overtones of panic and menace, are, at best, the engine of social change. The trouble is that the oppressed are a motley bunch with more or less righteous causes and justifiable tactics. From the Chartists to Seattle, the history of direct action is littered with the laudable and the loutish. All such crusades are cloaked in the one-size-fits-all mantle of worthy struggle and just ends. Group power of any sort teeters uneasily between the mild and the mad.  So what provoked the most recent cocktail of protest and panic? Daniel Bell, the American sociologist and the father of the Third Way, would say that the deferred gratification of early capitalist production has yielded to instant fixes and grab-it-all hedonism. Whether panicking Persil-hoarders or Coutts-card fashion victims scouring the planet for the last pair of must-have Prada slingbacks, we are all mad consumers now.  David Howell, in his new book, The Edge of Now, argues that current unrest will be stilled once we learn to love the global marketplace and rediscover the Victorian conflation of commerce and   virtue. Perhaps so, but there never was a halcyon age of accord. The link between protest and the market has been going on since nineteenth-century food rioters discovered that an end to feudal structures equalled dearer grain. But in a modern democracy, the cult of direct action, only partly targeted on financial concerns, looks increasingly bizarre. Blankets of flowers for Diana, petrol bombs for the alleged paedophiles of the Paulsgrove estate, fox-hunters on the warpath, guerrilla gardeners trashing London: is this the normal cut-and-thrust of focus groups unleashed or a signal of something more sinister?  Mob-mourning for Diana was always a leading indicator that the flood tide of British sentiment, if skewed to other ends, might turn nasty. The paedophile protest, conducted in the name of innocent children, proved just how vicious.  Politicians, enjoined to 'listen', a synonym for 'cave in', have, at least until the petrol d&eacute;b&acirc;cle, riskily preferred emollience to condemnation when dealing with special interest groups. But stifling uproar can be a zero sum game, particularly when a febrile British public behaves as if, give or take a few screaming owls and crying crickets, we are all participants in the last act of  Macbeth.  Implicit in this mood is a justifiable suspicion that something odd is happening to democracy. When peaceful protesters against the Chinese President are bundled into police vans and anti-paedophile vigilantes are humoured, something is awry. When an unelected House Of Lords forces the retention of Section 28, its obduracy looks suspiciously like mob rule decked in ermine. And when Lord Melchett and 27 allies charged with criminal damage walk free from Norfolk Crown Court after admitting destroying a GM crop, it is truly time to reach for one's wallet.  The verdict effectively means that hardliners, certain that the public cheers for them, will feel freer to wreak havoc with scientists' legitimate crop trials and besiege beleaguered farmers newly returned from manning the petrol barricades. This vicious circle of protest points up the power vacuum afflicting government. Although not responsible for the Melchett jury's call, politicians set the scene for clemency in failing to make the case that GM crops, potentially a vital future resource, should be properly tested. Instead, the debate became mired in charges of corporate exploitation and in a suspicion, undented so far, that the public, still understandably horrified by BSE, was being lined up for the vegetarian version.  And so the crop protesters will be back. A neo-Luddite band emboldened now to consider themselves beyond the reach of the law, they are the latest ragtag army so easily conscripted in a post-industrial Britain where ideology falters and power belongs to any self-interest group with a mood-grabbing campaign and a wish to bend the Government to its will. The clout once applied by state or unions is mutating into what E.P. Thompson called 'collective bargaining by riot'. Public uprisings do occasionally pitch it right, as in the outcry for more money for the health service, but in the main, they specialise in the selfish, the blinkered and the vindictive.  None of that might matter, except for the dangerous gulf between the brilliance of the strategy of internet-age direct action and the vacuity of its aims. The recent overall gain of twentieth-century protest, and its sideline of panic, is as follows: a stream of sex offenders driven underground, a freer hand to block legitimate scientific progress and a stash of superfluous shower gel.  Such a tally might have puzzled those, from Luther King to Pankhurst, who made direct action the accelerator of social progress. Today, it seems more like its drag anchor. That is why Tony Blair's toughness towards petrol protesters is right. And why William Hague's moment of bonding with the 'fine, upstanding' citizens of the picket line will prove to be less than serendipitous.