Dog lovers will understand why Prince Charles has been enraged by the publication of memoirs by Ken Wharfe, who was once Princess Diana's bodyguard. The latest extract, published in the Sunday Times, offered an unprecedented insight into life in the kitchens at Highgrove, where, according to Wharfe, an imaginative chef once placed the prince's favourite Jack Russell inside a warm oven. Although Tigger was removed, lightly done, to survive until the age of 18, the enduring mental scars can only be imagined. But terrier-torture aside, you might think there is much for the royal family to celebrate in Wharfe's book. With his tales of Diana's nocturnal leaps from windows and hysterics aboard John Latsis's gin palace, the author adds some substance to the hints of mental instability which the prince's camp had been issuing for years.  These anecdotes are obviously less rewarding for Diana's sons, but the boys may be more resilient than we know. After all, no filial distress was reported earlier this summer when the Queen's friend, Lady Kennard, described Diana as "damaged", Lady Penn delicately raised the matter of "mental instability", and the Countess of Mountbatten let slip that "there were sides to Diana that were different to what was seen on public occasions". Although most viewers will have gathered that the late princess was barking mad - far, far madder than the "jovial" character recalled by Wharfe - the Palace registered no displeasure.  Wharfe's most valuable service to the royal family, however, must be his insistence that the "malicious rumours, which persist even now, about the paternity of Prince Harry" are unfounded. The dates, as he shows, don't fit, Harry having been born two years before Diana met her lover (who claimed, in his own recent book, that he had inherited the position from Diana's late detective, Barry Mannakee). Wharfe adds that "the red hair the gossips so love to cite as 'proof' is a Spencer trait . . ."  Well said, Wharfe. It is hard to think of a more valuable example of royal protection. Given that blood, as opposed to brains or talent, or good behaviour, is the one thing that entitles members of the royal family to their position and public funds, dubiety about their genetic qualifications is more damaging than the most damning evidence of disreputable or hypocritical behaviour - the routine stuff of royal bestsellers - could ever be. With Harry's qualifications for lifelong state support now settled, the royal family can move on to the much more serious threat presented by AN Wilson's intriguing claim, in a new book The Victorians, that Queen Victoria was fathered by her mother's secretary. If true - a question that could easily be settled with DNA tests on living descendants - we might soon have to find an entire new royal family.  Assuming, for the sake of argument, that the current sovereign and her family are our legitimate rulers, does Wharfe's account of Diana give them any cause for the vapours, or "Queen's fury at Betrayal" as those fury addicts on the Daily Mail put it? Unless the Sunday Times is uncharacteristically holding the most scandalous until last, the fuss is comically disproportionate. If Wharfe's new anecdotes are unflattering, they are equally inconsequential. We already know from the faithful Morton's transcripts that Diana threw herself downstairs while pregnant: should we be amazed at her later, rather more considered leap from a Swiss balcony into deep snow? Most of the recollections published under Wharfe's name merely offer a different angle, or additional detail on episodes or affairs that are no longer disputed. If we hadn't heard that she gave Hewitt money for a TVR sports car, it was well known, from various accounts of their affair, including Hewitt's, that the princess indulged him with many other, no less vulgar presents (item: "a tie pin with a fox's head in diamonds"). Even a proudly displayed Wharfe gobbet concerning the princess's favourite mascot - a vibrator - will fail to stun anyone familiar with Shadows of a Princess, by the princess's private secretary, Patrick Jephson, who depicted his mistress as a vain and calculating harridan. The only significant discrepancy, comparing the two accounts, is that Wharfe describes it as "a small vibrator", while Jephson distinctly recalls it being "large". It's just a question of perspective.  As for the dimensions of his betrayal, Wharfe may well have wondered why he, unlike the princess's lover, and in contrast to so many of her old confidantes and healers, family and staff, friends and enemies, who have between them done such a thorough job of exposing her private life, should be excluded from the profits. After all, Wharfe himself is mentioned in numerous rival accounts - "avuncular" in Morton, "professional" in Jephson, "Diana's favourite" in Hewitt, and "xxxxxx" in Mary Berry's The Housekeeper's Diary, published in 1995, which it is forbidden to quote in this country.  Claiming her right to speak, Berry, like Charles's valet, Ken Stronach (who claimed he watched Charles pull a washbasin off the wall), argued that the prince and princess's own public confessions, Diana's in 1992 and Charles's in 1994, exempted previously discreet staff from their vows of eternal loyalty. "I'd known about the problem in their marriage for eight years," Berry said in 1995, having run away to America to escape Charles's lawyers, "and never even confided in my own family."   She was forgetting that, in secrecy as in everything else, the royal family does like to maintain feudal traditions. Simply because a prince or a countess, or even a half-witted cavalry officer has flourished the family's dirty linen does not mean that a valet, policeman or housekeeper may follow suit. In fact, in view of their treatment, wonderfully described by Berry, as barely conscious, morally neutral household appliances, witness to the most gruesome self-indulgence and routinely subjected to preposterous requests and tirades, it follows that revelations by servants, being more damaging than any other kind, should be the most savagely suppressed. But if Charles fails to exile Wharfe there is, at least, one small consolation. How else would he ever have known about Tigger?