A few weeks ago the Queen seduced journalists at Windsor Castle; last night another bunch of wild men, from the arts world and its periphery, were invited to witness the personal charms of Elizabeth II. Already, no doubt, Mick Jagger and Mick Hucknall are marvelling at just how small she is, once you see her up close. The Queen is so very small, apparently, that you might think her very easy to topple over, like a ninepin, but in these adulatory days, smallness, like everything else about her, only seems to make her more treasurable. What, until the dawn of this jubilee year, did we know about the Queen? That she was conscientious, religious, rich, animal-loving, though a bit on the chilly side if you happened to be one of her children. Prince Charles had said as much in his confessional sessions with Jonathan Dimbleby. Earlier this year, in articles extracted from his new biography of Elizabeth, the writer Graham Turner confirmed her preference for horses, adding that the monarch could be very rude to women and was a poor conversationalist on topics other than vets and flea collars. His was not a re-assuring conclusion: "The fact that our present Queen is a paragon of good behaviour - with a diffidence and modesty absent in almost all her predecessors - only serves to disguise the truth that our monarchy is now hopelessly out of kilter with the modern world."  At the time of writing that could not have looked like a particularly grudging verdict. Compared with the sort of comments being made about the Queen 10 years ago, it was sympathetic. In 1992, her "annus horribilis", the Queen and her family were routinely described with fabulous coarseness and disrespect. Her Latinate cry for help was translated in the Sun as "one's bum year". She and her family were so vastly unpopular, that when their castle burned down it provoked not so much sympathy as annoyance that the public might be asked to shell out for repairs. When, to make amends for that impudence, she offered to start paying taxes, the degree of public gratitude was encapsulated by a cartoon in the Mirror, which depicted her as scrooge under the headline, "HM the Tax Dodger".  By 1993, republicans such as the playwright David Hare were demanding a referendum on the future of the monarchy. "When it is said that our royal family is the envy of foreigners, I have always noticed that what foreigners particularly like is that it is ours and not theirs", he said at a monarchy debate organised by Charter 88. "It is not a pleasant prospect to have to wait for another war before the monarchy rediscovers a sense of purpose. When John Major calls for a classless society, then clearly it cannot be achieved without first removing this fountainhead of falsity and snobbery."  The attacks did not abate. As Ian Bradley says, in his recent book God Save the Queen, the whole decade was pretty horribilis. "It was in the 1990s that royalty seemed to lose its magic and mystery and to become ordinary." While younger royals collaborated eagerly with the tabloids in purging the monarchy of mystique, the republican movement gained confidence, even made a few converts. In June 2000, a Guardian poll revealed a dramatic fall in the proportion of people believing that Britain would be worse off without the monarchy, from 75% in 1990, to 44%.  More than likely, the deaths of the Queen Mother and Princess Margaret would have evoked enough public affection to see the Queen respectably through her jubilee. But the current monarchist fervour goes beyond decent sympathy: the woman who was scrooge has suddenly become lovable, even fashionable. Newly released pictures remind us how cute she was as a kid, how adorable as a brave young Queen. Newly inducted columnists testify to her extraordinary presence. Newly-licensed friends and supporters insist, in print and in William Shawcross's TV effusions, that, far from being cold, our Lilibet is as fun-loving, humorous and emotional as the next busy mother of four. Turner's remote dog-fanatic of a few months back has become a cross between Gloriana and Pookie the little rabbit. And as for not liking women! Only this week her childhood friend, Pamela Berry, offered sweet reminiscences from the 30s. "In the gardens, Princess Margaret lay in her pram while the friends skipped or played hopscotch..."  The little human details which were once enough to get Crawfie sent to eternal Coventry, are now issued officially, and most effectively. We feel her pain. And we feel her not feeling pain. "She respects emotion, and cannot fake it", writes Martin Amis in the New Yorker, in a review of Robert Lacey's latest dollop of Queen-lit. "The monarchy allows us to take a holiday from reason; and on that holiday we do no harm." So much, then, for the "fountainhead of falsity and snobbery" which exercised radicals late last century.  So doting is the mood of this demi-Restoration that it has obliterated, almost entirely, any unwelcome news about our favourite, from the confirmation that the Queen Mother's £50m will is not merely secret, but exempt from plebeian death duties, to the announcement that Charles's portion, Clarence House, may benefit from a £5m refurbishment grant from the state. Instead, interest focuses on her jubilee arts awards of £10,000 each for five young artists - gifts described by one paper this week as "an unprecedented gesture of personal generosity". So generous, in fact, that they became the pretext for last night's party at the Royal Academy, when the latest batch of great and good came to have their tummies royally tickled. There, among those listed in the London Evening Standard's "amazing array of guests who will celebrate the Queen's generosity", was the playwright and republican, Sir David Hare.  What can have happened? Anthony Barnett, founder of Charter 88, discerns, with some understatement, a general "loss of nerve". It irks him, and has come about, he thinks, because of the republican tendency to focus argument on one family and its personalities rather than on the worthy, but admittedly dull intricacies of constitutional reform. As Tom Nairn writes, in a piece called The Party is Over, posted today on Barnett's openDemocracy.net, "Arguing for abolition of royalty by itself will merely arouse a protective instinct in the heart of this increasingly heartless world." The Queen, like Diana, seems to have achieved a surge in personal popularity through projected vulnerability, the key difference being that the Queen's assailants are republicans, rather than the royal family.  In an article in Vanity Fair, William Shawcross remarks, by way of a warning, "There is an alternative to the Queen... It is a republican president, a nominally elected head of state." Clearly confusing the woman with the institution, he forgets those infinite other alternatives to the Queen: her heirs. For all her many gifts, she has yet to achieve divinity. Had her gruesome uncle eluded Mrs Simpson, we should never have got to know her in the first place. Had she died young, we would have got Princess Margaret. And Roddy. Some day, we shall have Prince Charles, who will probably, as Turner reminds us, "seek to be more interventionist in public policy than his mother ever was". Have the Queen's hacks and intellectuals had their heads momentarily turned? Or are they now confirmed subjects, whoever the monarch?  Whatever the reason for this extraordinary spectacle, it is enough to turn you into a republican.