Prince Edward has complained that the British hate success. So let's prove him wrong. Congratulations to Ardent Productions, the Prince's television company, which - we recently learned - made a profit last year! An improvement of almost £250,000 compared with the previous year! A profit, in short, of £30,000! While this is not, admittedly, the kind of money that will go far at the Prince's home, Bagshot Park, where Ardent is run from the stables, it is an undeniable upturn for a company which has lost £1.9m since it was founded in 1993, and one which can only continue now that the palace has decreed that there is no conflict in being both a serving, publicly-funded prince and a dynamic entrepreneurial prince who flogs television programmes about princely people. Indeed, the palace plainly sees no reason why the two sets of duties should not work in perfect harmony: in a few week's time the Prince and his consort, Sophie/director, R-JH, depart for Canada, where they will open an athletics championship. After that, Edward will stay on for business meetings for Ardent Productions. It was of course a previous official trip, to Brunei, after which the Prince announced that the Sultan of Brunei had become an investor in his company and the subject of a forthcoming Ardent production, that helped inspire the Lord Chamberlain Lord Luce's investigation into the propriety of royalty and business careers. News of Edward's Sultan coincided with the revelation from Sophie's pretend sheik that she considered royal connections an "unspoken benefit" for those who patronised her PR firm. A few days ago, the Lord Chamberlain's findings were announced. What should be done? Well, essentially, nothing. "It is entirely in tune with today's world," the palace announced, "that members of   the royal family should be allowed to pursue careers, including in business, if that is what they wish to do." There was a notably muted response to this long-awaited announcement, probably because it coincided with the publication of an interview with Prince Charles, in which the heir to the throne appeared to say he might one day marry his mistress. He also talked about his "personal" view of the monarchy. "I actually think some people want stability and continuity somewhere in their lives - something that isn't frenetically fashionable, but which is just there." You gathered, then, that the Prince is not too bothered about "today's world", and the need for people like Sophie and Edward to exploit their connections so as to be in tune with it.  By all accounts, the Prince and his sister Anne had done what they could to cleanse the Bagshottian stables, but been overruled by their father, Philip the Bad, who has been touched by Sophie's interest in carriage driving, a sport he more or less invented. In the royal soap opera, this passes for an uncommonly interesting episode, the best since Sophiegate. It confirms that Philip, though a soft touch for blonde horseflesh enthusiasts, is not the blithering constitutional irrelevance many had taken him to be, and raises the possibility that the fall of the House of Windsor will not be completed, as is usually believed, by the destructive appetite of the    media, but by the greed and folly of Charles's own flesh and blood. If only, Charles must now be thinking, he had taken an interest in competition carriage driving, a pastime described by the British Horse Driving Trials Association as a "fast-moving and exhilarating sport" featuring "adrenalin pumping, mud-flying action". It might even have been enough, in stressful moments with his father, to have flourished a dog-eared copy of the Duke's book, Competition Carriage Driving (now available in a revised and enlarged edition, which will, according to experts, "be welcomed by all who aspire to drive four-in-hand competition.") But it is too late. Stability has lost to carriage   driving.  Will the modernisers finish the job? In "today's world" it is obviously ridiculous that Edward, Sophie and their fellow buccaneers should continue to use made-up titles instead of their real names and to undertake official trips on which they are passed off as representative of their country. In today's world, moreover, they can hardly wish to continue accepting Edward's £140,000 hand-outs from his mother's civil list earnings, living in a house that is so absurdly beyond their needs and means, and employing a brigade of domestics. As Regan so   pertinently asks in King Lear: "What need one?" If Lear could do without a live-in cleaning lady, so, surely, can this pair of healthy and independent-minded young professionals. If the monarchy, as the palace has just announced, truly wishes to embrace the "modern challenge", then as well as being free to follow their careers, junior members must be free to go about without pomp and fuss, in fact, to be treated as most of us are, like cattle.  If repudiation of privileges on this scale is a lot to ask of a group which has been schooled in parasitism since birth, the new and modern alternative might be to consider their careers as portfolios - and switch to jobs that will never invite allegations of status-exploitation. Outside the Wessexes' chosen fields of television and PR, the possibilities for lives of quiet, unacknowledged competence are legion. Who cannot picture Sophie Rhys-Jones as a blameless dental hygienist? Edward as Ready Eddie, your first choice in children's party entertainment? Princess Michael in full make up, squirting giant atomisers in a provincial perfume hall? Her husband behind the wheel of a minicab? Their cousins, the Gloucesters, expatiating on world affairs from the counter of a village post office? In today's world, who can say this little band of royal hangers-on wouldn't be happier living honestly off their talents, rather than contemptibly on the state?  But the palace has chosen to proceed gradually. There will be no register of interests, no code of conduct. The closest the Lord Chamberlain comes to suggesting any limit to royal entrepreneurship is a proposal that their business associates appoint a "watchdog" to ensure that the royals are being employed on their talents alone. Obviously we can depend on these watchdogs not to bark, otherwise most of the minor royals would never work again. It is business as usual. All in all, the Luce report is a triumph for republicans, Wessexes and carriage drivers alike. The one person whose interests are damaged is Prince Charles. And who cares about him? Not, for sure, his father, his mother or his youngest brother.   <BR><BR><B>It's the Helen and Ken show</B><BR><BR> Ken Livingstone: an apology. In the past, this column may have occasionally suggested that the mayor of London is a tedious megalomaniac who has achieved precisely nothing since he was elected. I should now like to point out that Ken is, in fact, both efficient and    lovable, bubbling with ideas and with a personal touch which has endeared him to Londoners the length and breadth of the capital. For this, and much more evidence of the great transformation Ken is about to achieve, even if he has not quite done it yet, I'm indebted to On magazine, a publication which arrived, unsought, through the letterbox this week. The cover story, illustrated with a   gracious photograph of the pair nestling together, is an interview with Ken by Prime Suspect star and sex symbol, Helen Mirren. As an actress, she comes up with some unexpected questions: "So, do people recognise you when you take the tube to work?" ("Yes...But they ignore me"). Any Londoners still baffled as to what the mayor has been doing on our behalf, other than fight Gordon Brown, will find page upon page of information. Livingstone has met rough sleepers. He has proposed a traffic congestion charge. He wants Trafalgar Square to be "clean and safe". He's suggested a new route for the Notting Hill Carnival.  Not least, he has got to meet Helen Mirren. And if anyone doubts that, he has produced a magazine full of pictures that prove it. Thanks, Ken.