Private. Intensely private. That, for a very long time, was as much as we were told about Camilla Parker-Bowles. True, the woman had more reason than most to be private, but love of privacy, her friends insisted, would have been a Parker-Bowles quality even if she hadn't got involved in a 25-year affair with her future sovereign and endured having their intensely private smutty telephone call transcribed as entertainment for the masses. Since she was so private, not being officially acknowledged or generally liked seemed to suit Camilla just fine. "She is without personal ambition," revealed Ingrid Seward, one of her supporters, "and insists she will always be happier pruning the roses than planting them." "Camilla becomes nervous when the spotlight turns on her," said fellow sympathiser Stuart Higgins, a former editor of the Sun.  All she wanted, her friends said, was to be with Charles. "She's a very private person - I can't see her cutting ribbons," Patti Palmer-Tomkinson, a friend of the couple, told the New Yorker in 1997. "I've never heard them mention marriage. While they've got each other in private it's their romance; it belongs to them."  That summer, when everyone still expected the Diana v Camilla story to run for ever, a love of privacy was starting to look like rather an attractive quality. While the princess pranced around the Mediterranean in high-cut swimsuits, public opinion began to soften towards Camilla. It may even have helped when Diana's new boon companion, Mohamed al Fayed, whose son would become her lover, gave a press conference in which he boasted about their intimacy and declared that "Camilla's like something from a Dracula film compared with Diana,   who is so full of life". In July 1997, just before her 50th birthday, 68% of those polled for the Daily Mirror said Charles should be free to marry Camilla. William Hill cut the odds of the couple marrying before the turn of the century from 6-1 to 3-1. Two months later, Diana was dead.  As Diana worshippers clamoured for vengeance, Camilla returned to her privacy. In fact, as reported by the kindly Higgins, she "temporarily vanished from view while she supported Prince Charles, giving him hope for the future". Business as usual, really. When she came to vulgar notice in 1992, with the publication of extracts from Andrew Morton's Diana: Her True Story, Camilla had been avoiding public notice and giving Prince Charles hope for the future for a good decade or two already.   The press only caught on when Morton transcribed Diana's charge that Camilla had haunted her marriage since her honeymoon, with the implication that the affair with Charles had resumed, and was now callously conducted in full view of staff, neighbours and friends. The day the extracts appeared, Camilla's home fell under siege. "It's fiction, it's fiction," said a helpless Andrew Parker-Bowles.  According to the rushed biographies that followed, Camilla Shand, the scantily educated daughter of a master of foxhounds, and great grand-daughter of Alice Keppel, mistress of Edward VII, had instantly appealed to Prince Charles when they met in 1972. Although not, as they   say, photogenic, Camilla is reputed to have had many other charms, "animal magnetism" foremost among them. And crucially, as Jonathan Dimbleby recorded in his hagiography, "she was convulsed by the Goons".  Royal-watching mythology has it that, on their first encounter, Camilla propositioned Charles thus: "My great-grandmother and your great-great-grandfather were lovers. So how about it?" The animal magnetism did its bit. "It finally made him a man," one of Camilla's "friends" told Christopher Wilson, the author of A Greater Love, Charles and Camilla.  Which makes it all the more ungrateful that the newly virile Prince Charles promptly embarked on an eight-month cruise aboard HMS Minerva. By the time he returned, Camilla had married a cavalry officer called Andrew Parker-Bowles, a match that appeared, at the time, to have been made in animal magnetism heaven.  So the royal dalliance was put on hold. But after the Parker-Bowleses had had their two children, Camilla and Charles's feelings would no longer be denied. "To most of the population," Christopher Wilson remarks, "theirs was a passion which simply did not exist. But a privileged few were witness to an astonishing display of the almost animal attraction that the two now had for each other." At the Cirencester Polo Club Ball, he reports, the pair were seen "kissing each other, French kissing, dance after dance". On another occasion, a "trusted friend" reported, the heir to the throne was unable to resist the attractions of Camilla's favourite dress: "Charles took one look at it, plunged his hands down the front and grabbed her breasts. In mixed company, that is not the done thing." Indeed not.  Charles bought a new house, Highgrove, because it was close to Bolehyde Manor, the recently   acquired seat of the Parker-Bowleses, and the magnetic twosome, now nicely settled, set about procuring the prince an official wife.  Once Diana had been installed, the affair temporarily ceased, only to be reignited as the royal marriage disintegrated. "Camilla was normal," contends Christopher Wilson. "She was grown up. She was womanly, with voluptuous curves, not a bag of bones. She was sexually adventurous. And she was, in all truth, a very nice woman." Who could ask for more?  As Charles later pointed out in a television interview, his marriage had "irretrievably broken down" by the time he and Camilla resumed extra-marital proceedings. Andrew Parker-Bowles was allegedly happy to try his luck elsewhere. Diana was enjoying riding lessons with James Hewitt. There was nothing - unless you count the princes and the Parker-Bowleses' children, and, perhaps, Charles's future as Defender of the Faith - to stand in the path of true love. Had Diana not told Morton about the arrangement, it might have gone on for years, even become the done thing. But in December 1992, six months after Morton's revelations, John Major announced a royal separation. Outside her house, Camilla gave a statement: "If something has gone wrong I'm very sorry for them," she said. "But I know nothing more than the average person in the street. I only know what I see on television."  Her fib was exposed just a few weeks later when newspapers published a taped conversation between the Prince and Mrs Parker-Bowles.   Camilla was not, it made clear, "an average person in the street". Unless, that is, average persons in the street are in the habit of calling Charles at midnight, and telling him they miss him desperately, desperately, desperately. There was more. Loyal subjects were touched by a section in which the faithful Bowles beseeched the Prince to let her see his latest speech. Most of the tape, however, comprised complicated arrangements for future assignations and lustful declarations. Camilla: "I need you all the week, all the time." Charles: "Oh, God, I'll just live inside your trousers or something." It was suggested, to their shared amusement, that Charles be reincarnated as a Tampax. So this was what animal magnetism sounded like.  At the time, the tape seemed to constitute a blow from which the royal family - and Charles in particular - would never recover. How, after this, would the prince ever dare to lecture his subjects on aesthetics, on the English language, on spirituality? But the damage to the prince's reputation was short-lived. Within months of what could have been eternal disgrace, Prince Charles was droning away like 10 men, as if nothing had happened, on everything from the horrors of modern architecture to his role as "Defender of the Divine".  In fact, those who wish the royal family would keep their opinions to themselves owe a debt of gratitude to Camilla Parker-Bowles. One might   go further. Until the dreadful day earlier this month when Camilla was formally conversed with by the Queen, she was the model royal: shy, opinion-free, almost invisible. If she has opinions on GM foods, she is to be congratulated on not sharing them with us. If she cares, like her boyfriend, about Shakespeare, Islam and organic carrots, she has done the decent thing of never mentioning it. It was too good too last. Sooner or later, Camilla would have to become a role model, like her ghastly future in-laws. Not long after Diana's death, Charles's spivs got to work. Camilla was seen out and about, she was reputed to be tolerated by the young princes, and now, less than three years since she seemed to be doomed to life as a Chippenham-based anchoress, Camilla is inches away from public acceptability. The archbishop of Canterbury offers consolation over tea. She entertains Scottish prelates with her prince. Last week 68% of Mirror readers said she and Charles should marry. William Hill's odds on the pair getting hitched within a year have dropped to 6-4. Tabloids that would once have rejoiced to see her hung, drawn and quartered now scream, "Marry her!"  If nothing is done, it is only a matter of time before Charles's privacy-loving helpmeet is up there beside him, planting trees, cutting ribbons, and preaching the joys of Islam, or reed-bed sanitation units, or whatever her partner's latest hobby happens to be. For however earthy, independent and sensible Camilla may be in other respects, when it comes to the massive folly of worshipping a twerp like Charles, she is peerless. Remember her "great achievement"? "Your great achievement is to love me," Charles said, unbelievably, on that tape. And even more unbelievably, Camilla took it as a compliment. If only we could attribute it to her Goonish sense of humour.