The single-mindedness of the Democratic party in Boston during its 2004 convention has been increasingly striking and, in the end, increasingly impressive. At the start of the week, many found it suspiciously contrived. No personal attacks against a president whose very election still sticks in the craw of most Democrats? Surely they could not be serious. No direct assaults on an Iraq invasion which, surveys suggested, most delegates overwhelmingly opposed? Did this party still believe in anything at all? To which the answer, as the week went on, is that it does. It believes in revenge as a dish best eaten cold, and in the instinct that says: don't get mad - get even. For this is an angry party - angry against George Bush ever since November 2000, and angrier still over Iraq - and its discipline comes from its anger. There were accusations, not denied, that all speeches from the platform - and there were dozens and dozens of them over four days - had been vetted, and in some cases edited, to be on message. In the end, though, the message was not to go easy on Bush or on the Iraq war, but to go easy on the cheap attacks, so that the really effective ones could hit home.  Because hit home they did. By the time the week in Boston reached its climax on Thursday night, it had become clear that the Democrats have at last evolved a far more effective and trenchant critique of Bush and his war than would have seemed possible in the spasm of political fear that gripped the party's congressional leadership in the im mediate wake of September 11, when they decided to lie low and not offer hostages to fortune. Now, as Boston showed, that has changed. Defensiveness has not been banished entirely, but there is a clear willingness to take the argument to Bush. It is an argument, what is more, that has many uncomfortable implications for Tony Blair.  The Democratic party's inability to formulate a way of attacking Bush which did not simultaneously open it to the attack of being unpatriotic has been an albatross around the party's neck for nearly two years. That predisposition to fear, it should immediately be said, long predates 9/11; its roots go back to Vietnam and beyond, even to the McCarthyite witch-hunts. It was also, very importantly, part of the ambivalent legacy of the Clinton presidency. The pre-emptive cringe did not commence on September 12 2001.  Anyone who began the week thinking that the order had gone out from John Kerry not to mention the war would have had to revise that view long before Kerry finally entered the hall on Thursday night to deliver his acceptance speech. In retrospect, the gradual emergence of a coherent Democratic critique of Bush was implicit in Clinton's speech back on Monday night, and especially in his comment - rapturously received by an audience which fully understood its implication - that "strength and wisdom are not opposing values".  In Europe, or to the worldwide followers of Michael Moore, words such as those may appear so cryptic that it would seem ludicrous to interpret them as the starting point of a new mainstream critique of Bush. But that is not so obvious to the political class of a nation whose public discourse was traumatised for so many months by the domestic political blitzkrieg launched by Bush after 9/11, and which hurt the Democrats so badly in the midterm elections of 2002.  The new bandwagon rolled a little faster on Tuesday, when Ted Kennedy, in the course of an otherwise lacklustre speech, brought the convention alive by saying that America should have "strengthened not scorned" its alliances. The same night, the party's new rising star, Barack Obama, created the same effect with a wildly applauded pledge to stand by Arab-Americans when their civil liberties were attacked.  It rolled faster still on Wednesday, when an array of former generals, admirals, ambassadors and a former CIA chief, headed by the former chairman of the joint chiefs of staff John Shalikashvili took to the platform with an increasingly explicit attack on the administration. "We must go to war only when all other efforts to resolve the threat have been exhausted," the retired general insisted, adding: "We should never go to war without a comprehensive plan for how to secure the peace once military victory has been won."  It was Kerry himself, though, who carried this approach furthest and gave it greatest prominence. For, by devoting almost half of his   acceptance speech to national security issues, Kerry put the Iraq war and the failures of the war on terrorism unmistakably at the centre of this year's presidential election. Having equivocated on the issue for months - as many Democratic senators have done - Kerry has finally defined the issue in terms and at a time of his own choosing. Part of this election is now explicitly about Bush's response to 9/11.   A ll week, expectations for Kerry's speech had been skilfully managed down. As a result, the directness of much of what it contained came as a surprise. It had seemed, at first, as if his Vietnam record - as a decorated and wounded veteran who then turned against the war - would be asked to bear the weight of the critique. In some ways it did so; Kerry's navy veteran buddies were at the centre of the build-up to the candidate's appearance in the convention hall on Thursday night and there can be few Americans now who are unaware of Kerry's remarkable story and of the powerful implied contrast with that of his contemporary Bush.  Nevertheless, Kerry's speech moved the critique from implicit to explicit. His credibility on Vietnam, it transpired, was to be the platform on which the Democrats' new leader laid claim to credibility on the war on terror too, a credibility which the party had been denied, and had denied itself, for so long.  Early in the speech, Kerry suddenly moved from a recitation of his life story to say: "I will be a commander-in-chief who will never mislead us into war. I will have a vice-president who will not   conduct secret meetings with polluters to rewrite our environmental laws. I will have a secretary of defence who will listen to the best advice of our military leaders. And I will appoint an attorney general who actually upholds the constitution of the United States."  It was an electrifying moment, or so it felt in the hall - the kind of moment that Kerry's detractors doubted he could trigger - and it set the pattern for a speech far better than most American pundits had expected. Again and again, without the kind of overt Bush-bashing that risks offending mainstream voters, Kerry sought to draw new lines, open new areas of argument, to bring essential issues into play and, above all, to challenge Bush's monopoly of the war and security issue. If this was a boxing match, you would say that, having played "rope-a-dope" for so long, Kerry had suddenly decided to make a fight of it.  The other half of Kerry's speech concentrated on the economic, social and welfare issues around which Democrats could ordinarily hope to build a credible electoral challenge. To have any chance of doing that, though, Kerry had to find a way of negating - and even undermining - Republican ascendancy on the security issues in what Bush sees as a war election. It is too soon to say if Kerry has succeeded, but it was an audacious and intelligent piece of timing from a candidate who has been written off too easily in the past as risk-averse. With this speech, the phoney electoral war is over. Battle in the most important election in modern American history has now been joined.