He scared them at first, a Hollywood cowboy who rose to the most powerful office in the world with seemingly no background in or any grasp of foreign affairs. Thus, yesterday, the Washington Post's London correspondent Glenn Frankel summed up for his paper's readers the European view of the late Ronald Reagan. But it's not just Reagan he is talking about. If the images sound familiar, that's because they are. Delete the word Hollywood from the top sentence and the Post's verdict on Europe on Reagan would seamlessly apply to many of George Bush's write-ups too. Nor does it end there. In a general sense, Frankel might really have been describing European views towards most American presidents of the past half-century.  Bill Clinton may nowadays be every European's favourite president, but in office he was mostly treated as a glib lightweight. Bush senior was seen here as too stiff. Jimmy Carter, also well regarded in retirement, was seen as too lightweight, and Gerald Ford as too dumb. Contemporary views about Richard Nixon and Lyndon Johnson were hardly generous either. If John Kennedy is an exception, which is disputable, martyrdom has much to do with it. Think back, and it is hard to identify an American president since Franklin Roosevelt whom Europeans have genuinely respected, genuinely admired, genuinely engaged and identified with, and above all have looked to as an international leader. Neither Dwight Eisenhower, who qualified for it on all counts, nor Harry Truman, the favourite president of many connoisseurs, won that kind of respect.  The obvious and not very flattering thing to say about all this is that many Europeans are simply snobs about American leaders. A more historical explanation - which particularly applies to the British and the French - is that they still haven't got over what happened to their world after D-day. Those with subtler sensors picked some of this up in the speeches and observances in Normandy at the weekend.  But there was an awful lot more to Reagan than the ability to irritate Europeans. Even his greatest critics are acknowledging this week that he was not just another American president. And even although his rhetoric about the Soviet Union and his deployment of cruise missiles seemed to indicate a willingness to fight world war three in Europe, he was never personally provocative or disrespectful to the old world in the way that Bush and several senior members of his administration have seemed to be.  Reagan matters most of all because of the changes in America that he represented and of which he was himself also a catalyst. The fashionable thing to say about him since his death is that he made Americans feel good about themselves after the turmoils of Vietnam, urban riots and Watergate. But the optimism explanation can also be overdone. Reagan's real significance may not so much derive from what he did, as from the fact that he gave deft leadership on a watershed between different eras of American life. He did so, moreover, in ways that have not always been well enough understood here but whose cumulative effects have changed not just the US itself but the nature of the transatlantic relationship as well.  Reagan's presidency marked a series of decisive tipping points in American life. The country he left behind in 1989 was very different from the one he inherited in 1981. This was not simply because of Reaganomics, the witches' brew of tax cuts, government deficits and increased defence spending that has subsequently been readopted by Bush. Nor was it even because he called on Mikhail Gorbachev to tear down that wall - and because, against most expectation, it then happened. From both an American and a global perspective, the really crucial change was in America itself. It was the shift, which Nixon also represented, in the balance of importance from the north and east, historic powerhouses of American political economy, to the south and west, away from the Atlantic and towards the Pacific.  It was entirely appropriate that Reagan's political career was based, like Nixon's, in California, America's new defining state of the late 20th century. With huge symbolism, Reagan's arrival in the White House also coincided with the moment in US history when the majority of Americans for the first time lived west of the Mississippi. In his years of power, cities like Houston, Dallas and Phoenix entered America's top 10 for the first time (ousting British colonial era places like Baltimore and Boston), while Los Angeles finally replaced Chicago as the second city in the land.  Reagan's presidency also coincided with the eclipse of the rust-belt industrial economy of the midwest and the eastern seaboard and its replacement as the engine of American, indeed global, prosperity by the microchip-driven sunrise industries of Arizona, California and the Pacific north-west. Alongside these shifts came the beginning of the modern decline of America's trade unions, strong in the dying industries but without a foothold in most of the new ones, and the rapid growth of individual shareholding on a level unmatched in Europe. All this came at the moment when the proportion of Americans born outside the US bottomed out for the first time for many decades and began rising steeply again as Asians and Africans, not Europeans, became the latest new Americans. And in politics the Reagan years marked the moment when the Republican party successfully captured the post-civil rights south and large sections of the white urban working class of the midwest from the Democrats. No president since Roosevelt presided over such epochal change in America as did Reagan.  The America of the past two decades is therefore Reagan's America. The imposing fact that he is about to become the first president since Johnson to receive a state funeral in Washington may look less imposing when one realises that, with the exception of Nixon, Reagan is also the only president to die since LBJ. Nevertheless the honour is an entirely appropriate one. You do not have to agree with the Reagan Legacy Project - which campaigns for every city and county in America to have a lasting memorial to him - to recognise that America became a new country on his watch.  It became, quite simply, a nation which grew away from Europe. It grew away from us economically, militarily, culturally and, above all, emotionally. It left us in a different place, not always conscious of the decisiveness of the change that Reagan had wrought, and in many cases underestimating the continuing dynamic of what he had bequeathed, particularly under Bush since 9/11. It left Europeans, including the British, needing to rethink our own place in the world, to answer a new set of harsher "Who are we?" questions. Reagan changed America forever, but in doing so he changed us forever too.