Whoever said that misfortunes come in threes must have had George Bush in mind these past few days. First the US president falls off his mountain bike and grazes his face. Then Michael Moore's anti-Bush movie gets the top prize at the Cannes film festival. And now, to cap a lousy weekend, it looks as if Bush is going to lose the election in November. Let me be clear. When I say Bush is going to lose, I don't and can't mean it in an absolutely-certain-to-lose, no-way-he-can-win, you-can-put-your-house-on-it sort of way. America's election is still more than five months away and the campaign has barely got out of second gear. Any number of factors, above all in Iraq in the coming weeks, could yet affect the outcome.  Nevertheless, the assumption on which politicians inside and outside America have operated, especially since September 11 2001, and which a large majority of American voters still endorse - that Bush will be re-elected for a second term on November 2 - is now no longer sustainable in the way that it once was. The facts have moved very decisively against it. That doesn't mean it won't happen. But it does mean that all those who have made their plans for the next few years on the basis that Bush will be president until 2008 - Tony Blair among them - need to get serious about the possibility of a John Kerry administration.  The fundamental justification for saying this is the fact that the US opinion polls have gone into a new and different phase for Bush in the past month or so. It's not simply that Kerry has moved slightly ahead of him in the most recent polling - although he has, by between two and five points in most May surveys. It's that some of the broader trends in public opinion are making things significantly less favourable for Bush and more favourable for Kerry.  As evidence, have a look at the answers to one of Zogby International's questions to American voters 10 days ago. Do you think the United States is headed on the right track or on the wrong track, Zogby asked? In April, 49 per cent said wrong track, against 44 per cent who said right track. By May, however, the "wrong track" score had risen to 54% and the "right track" score had fallen to 40 per cent.  That is a big swing on an indicator that normally spells bad news for an incumbent. Turning it around is no easy task. But something similar also appears to be happening in a shift that the Democratic party pollster Stan Greenberg reported last week. Was the war in Iraq worth the cost of US lives and dollars, or not worth it, Greenberg asked? At the end of March, 48 per cent of Americans thought it was worth the cost, against 47 per cent who thought it wasn't. Two months on, 55 per cent think the war was not worth it, with those who think it was now down to 41 per cent. That's another big shift. This is beginning to look like a critical mass.  You always have to be careful with opinion polls, and with American opinion polls in particular. National polls, like the ones just cited, are a less reliable pointer over there than over here. In a country as large and containing so many differences as the US, politics is famously local, and the nature of the electoral college system means that opinion in a handful of swing states will always hold the key in a close election. And this one, like 2000, will be close. As ever, the millions of dollars spent on television advertising in battleground states such as Ohio and Florida may shift numbers far enough for Bush to defy the national picture - just as happened in 2000.  That said, it is now perverse to deny the evidence that the odds are gradually but definitely moving against Bush. The tectonic plates are shifting, as John Prescott might put it. Greenberg says that Bush is now "a 47% president at best" and thus more likely to lose than to win. The collapse of confidence on Iraq is producing a wider desire for change, Greenberg believes. John Zogby agrees, pointing to his finding that only 43 per cent think Bush deserves to be re-elected, with 51 per cent saying it is time for someone new. This race, Zogby wrote the other day, "is John Kerry's to lose".   All of which raises the question of whether Kerry, the only other man with a serious shot at the presidency, can win the election that Bush is losing. Smart opinion on both sides of the Atlantic instinctively tends to doubt it. Too stiff, they say, too vulnerable under the fire that Bush will relentlessly aim his way. And perhaps that is right. Leads of two to five points feel like too little to defend when the onslaught comes.  Experienced observers have several retorts to that. That Kerry is much closer to Bush in Republican states than Bush is to Kerry in Democratic ones. That undecided voters tend to come down in favour of challengers rather than incumbents. That Kerry leads on the top two issues - the economy and Iraq - with most voters. That Kerry is historically a "good closer", who runs strongly in the final weeks of campaigns, as he proved in the primaries.  Political professionals - Labour as well as Democrat - still shake their heads. Why has he not exploited Bush's setbacks in Iraq more ruthlessly, they ask? Why has he not focused his message more clearly? Again there are solid answers. Because Kerry is playing a softly-softly long game. Because Bush's record in Iraq is doing Kerry's job for him. Because it isn't smart to attack Bush too strongly now for fear of letting him play the patriotic card.  Much of the more militant anti-Bush opinion is frustrated by Kerry too. They want him to do a Michael   Moore, to tear into Bush not just on Iraq but on the Middle East, on civil liberties, on inequality, on the environment and on the spiralling government deficit which the new book Colossus by Niall Ferguson (no Michael Moore he) identifies as the achilles heel of America's global role.  But Kerry is proving smarter than all these people think. Back in September 2001, Kerry was one of the Senate Democrats who supported his majority leader Tom Daschle in the hard but uninspiring decision to keep the party's head down on the war on terror. America's mood was such, they argued, that to attack Bush over Afghanistan, civil liberties or Iraq was to walk into the trap that Karl Rove, the president's strategist, was setting for the 2004 campaign. Rove's strategy was and is to present Bush as a strong and successful wartime leader. Daschle's wily response was to lie low. If the war on terror went brilliantly, Bush would win anyway. If it went badly, Daschle and Kerry were determined not to allow Bush to blame it on the Democrats.  It was a huge gamble. Yet if it looked craven in 2001, it begins to look a lot smarter today. As Bush began his fightback strategy on Iraq last night in Pennsylvania, opening a crucial phase of what the distinguished writer Elizabeth Drew this week rightly called America's "most consequential election in decades", it is Kerry, not Bush, who is now the man to beat.