Most of us grow up thinking about elections as battles between ideologies, between policies and between parties. And so, of course, they are. But, if powerful electoral trends in America are a model for the rest of the world - as in some respects they may be - then a new kind of contest could be shaping at the ballot box: a battle of the generations. Around 70 million Americans will go to the polls in tomorrow's United States midterm elections. If recent voting patterns and opinion polls are any guide, they will divide pretty much down the middle between the Republicans and the Democrats, just as they did two years ago. But experts now argue that tomorrow will be marked by twice as many old people as young people voting. In America, grey power is setting the political agenda - and the same thing could happen here too.  This is one of the least acknowledged trends of our youth-obsessed times. Twenty-eight Novembers ago, in the first autumn following Richard Nixon's resignation, Americans also went to the polls in the midterm elections. Back in 1974, however, 18% of those who voted were aged 30 or under, slightly outnumbering the 17% who were aged 65 or over. But by 1998, at the height of the impeachment of Bill Clinton, only 10% of those voting were 30 or under, while 23% were aged 65 or over.  From parity between the generations to a two-to-one disparity in less than 30 years is a big sociological shift. But if a new survey published in the US last month is correct, there is a lot more still to come. Twenty years from now, the report estimates, at least a third of all American voters will come from the 65-and-over group. By contrast, only 8% of voters will be 18-30s. This means that, by the 2022 midterms, today's two-to-one grey voter advantage will have become a four-to-one imbalance.  It is hard not to see this as a profound change. And it is of far more than merely demographic significance. Think about it only briefly and the potential enormity begins to sink in. It means that, for the foreseeable future, in America at least, the priorities of old voters are likely to count far more in determining the outcome of elections than young voters. As a result, political parties, and governments, will increasingly need to focus their thinking on the old, not on the young. And with an ageing population, these trends are likely to grow more pronounced, and not less, as the years pass.  As most of us know, older people think very differently about the world from younger people. In the new survey (which was conducted for the Washington Post, Harvard University and the Henry J Kaiser Family Foundation) the researchers underscored some of what the generational imbalance could mean in a policy context. If nothing else, the results seem to signal very good news for the defenders of the public sector.  Older voters, for instance, want to ensure that retirement benefits are secure; so, ever since the stock market downturn, they have been strongly opposed to risking their pensions on the markets. At least in America, that means that the party offering the strongest government underpinnings for retirement is likely to have a built-in advantage. If the same generational imbalance were to cross the Atlantic, pensions would become a far more important electoral issue.  Older voters also care much more about healthcare than younger voters. Here again, the pressure for better protection and more guarantees is certain to grow. The party that appears to be putting such security at risk is likely to be the loser.  In the light of these kinds of findings it is not surprising that the survey now puts the Democrats significantly ahead of the Republicans among elderly voters, in spite of grey voters' greater social conservatism. While the Republicans have a 5% lead among under-30s, the Democrats are ahead by 7% in the over-65s. Factor in the increased likelihood of older voters to vote, and the Democrat advantage looks even stronger. This survey therefore confirms the recent argument by the American writers John B Judis and Ruy Texeira that demographic and sociological change in America are working inexorably in favour of the Democrats, whatever may happen in tomorrow's voting.  But if these conclusions mean good news for the Democrats, they contain a bleak message for those who worry about the declining engagement of young voters in politics. Voting turnout is already low in the United States. It was 51% in the Bush-Gore presidential election two years ago, and a record low 36% in the 1998 midterms, figures that put Britain's shocking 59% in the 2001 general election into some perspective. But voting among 18-24s is notoriously lower even than the norm, and sank to 31% in the Bush-Gore contest.   Academics have long argued about the widespread assumption that alienation among young people is driving the wider decline in turnout. Harvard professor Thomas Patterson, who devised the so-called Vanishing Voter Project in the 2000 election, argued that levels of mistrust towards politicians are not necessarily greater among young voters. But his research (published in book form in the US earlier this year) showed that young people are more likely to translate mistrust into abstention.  Last month, Patterson told the Washington Post that the differential propensity to vote could now become a vicious circle. "If young people don't vote, their issues don't get addressed, which  further diminishes their incentive to participate in the process and keeps the downward spiral going. We've got a real disconnect between the rational strategies for candidates to win elections and good strategies for maintaining a healthy democracy."  The idea that a privileged group could use its electoral power to reinforce its own interests, and to resist those of rival groups, is not new. In the days of property qualifications, the rich used their votes to protect themselves against the poor. Before both sexes had equality, men used their votes to hold back women's rights. Racial and class majorities have used their power in similar ways.  But the emergence of such a pronounced generational cleavage in the electorate is something new. And there is no reason to suppose that it will be confined to America. According to the 1997 British Election Study, the over-65s were three times as likely as the under-25s to have "a great deal" of interest in politics, and there was a 14-point gap between the two groups' likelihood to vote. Little has happened since 1997 to cause that gap to narrow.  If anything like what is happening in America becomes established here, then the consequences could be enormous. Gradually, policy, politics and culture could be forced to abandon their love affair with young voters and concentrate instead on the voters who actually care, who actually matter and, above all, who actually vote.