Two years ago next week, millions of Americans went to the polls in a presidential election that too many people at the time believed offered them no real choice at all. Today, as they reflect on nearly two years of George W Bush's presidency, it would be nice to think that at least some of those observers now have the humility to acknowledge that they were utterly, utterly wrong.Whether you admire Bush or whether you despise him, or even if you take a more nuanced view of him, it would be the height of perversity to argue that his presence in the White House has made no difference to either America or the world. Only the most wilful supporter of Ralph Nader would still argue that things would not have been different if Al Gore, rather than Bush, had occupied the Oval Office these past two years.Leave aside issues like the Kyoto treaty, the unbalancing of the federal budget and tax cuts, and instead concentrate on just one question: what would have happened if the September 11 attacks had taken place on Gore's watch instead of Bush's?The answer, almost certainly, is that the Republicans would never in a month of Sundays have rallied - or cowered - behind the president in the way that the Democrats have done behind Bush over the last 14 months. In fact, they would have done the opposite. There can be no doubt at all that the first response of many on the right would have been crude and visceral - to blame Bill Clinton.President Gore's first phase military response to September 11 would not have differed significantly from President Bush's. Afghanistan would have been attacked, mainly from the air, and the ousting of the Taliban would have been Gore's first priority. But this would have happened against the backdrop of a vicious Republican campaign on Capitol Hill to turn the spotlight on those responsible for allowing the attack on America to occur. The bipartisanship on terrorism, which has been such a striking feature of post-9/11 Washington, would not have existed to anything like the same degree.How this would have played out over the longer term is more difficult to say. Gore, one can safely say, would not have beaten the drum for an invasion of Iraq in the same way that Bush has done. He would have been readier than Bush to address the Middle East crisis, though as one of Washington's most pro-Israel Democrats, Gore would have been almost as reluctant to confront Ariel Sharon as Bush has been. But Gore would have been far more effective than Bush in conversing with the rest of the world; the global disrespect for the Bush administration of recent months would been far less dangerous than it is today.So, as Americans go back to the polls next week to choose a new Congress and elect hundreds of new state and local officials, one thing should at least be clear. What happens on Tuesday November 5 matters - really matters - not just to Americans but to the rest of us around the world. In a world dominated by America, US elections are now, in a sense, our elections too. We don't have a vote in them. But we will all have to live  - or in some cases die - with the consequences.