Short of seeing the West Wing's Josiah Bartlet at the podium to address them, it is hard to think of any American politician who would offer a more reassuring transatlantic presence at the Labour party conference this week than Bill Clinton. The former president can be assured of a hero's welcome in Blackpool today when he delivers what the conference timetable, in one of its few remaining vestiges of old Labour-speak, still primly bills as the international fraternal address. Today's Clinton speech is the hottest ticket in town. But Clinton's standing in British politics was not always as high as it is today. With the significant exception of the Americophile modernisers around Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, who embraced him almost from the start, both left and right in British politics tended to look down on Clinton throughout much of his eight-year presidency as a tactician with a weakness for large-breasted women with big hair.  But the British habit of condescension towards Clinton is a thing of the past. Today, more than before, there is an awareness in this country of what we have lost since his departure from the White House 20 months ago.  Clinton will get a standing ovation in Blackpool for the simple but potent reason that he is not George Bush. Nearly two years into his presidency, Bush has broken all records as the most disrespected US president people on this side of the Atlantic have ever known. The contempt may be unfair, as Blair insists. It may say as much about Europeans as it does about Bush himself. But it is certainly genuine, and it undoubtedly guarantees Clinton a generous welcome.  Warmth towards Clinton and froideur towards Bush are two sides of the same coin. They are living proof of the unequalled importance of American politics and policy in British public affairs, of which Blair spoke feelingly yesterday in his own big speech. Clinton, a natural star who plays a crowd unerringly, will lap up his audience's delight at the big occasion today.  But Clinton supporters should keep their admiration in check. Granted, every phrase and adjective that Clinton utters will point up the contrast between Bush's stumbling ineptitude with the language and Clinton's unequalled command of modern political communications. Granted also, Clinton is certain to leave his listeners in no doubt that his internationalist view is infinitely closer to their own than Bush's "ourselves alone" Republican approach. But the former president is extremely unlikely to give the speech that many in the hall will want him to give.  In particular, it would be an enormous surprise if Clinton were to choose this occasion to deliver anything approaching a sustained public critique of Bush's Iraq policies. Privately, it is beyond doubt that Clinton shares most of the views on Iraq expressed by his vice-president, Al Gore, in San Francisco last week. Publicly, he is likely to be more circumspect.  Protocol partly explains this reluctance. America has a firm, if unwritten, patriotic convention that former presidents must not travel abroad and criticise the incumbent administration. British politics imposes its own similar informal constraint on the leader of the opposition. Clinton has absolutely nothing to gain by breaching such a rule.  But the principal constraints are political. There is not the slightest chance that Clinton will cut across anything that Blair said in his own speech yesterday. Clinton's visit is designed to boost Blair - and to boost Blair's transatlantic vision - not to rock Blair's boat. Expect Clinton to enshrine the continuing significance of September 11, to excoriate Saddam Hussein, to extol the United Nations, to promote the principles of global interdependence, and - above all - to make the case for American engagement with the world. But do not expect him to put these thoughts together in a call for Bush to moderate his policies towards Iraq. And do not expect him to say anything that will make Blair's own handling of the issue any more difficult than it is already.  There are, though, deeper reasons why the delegates should think before they welcome Clinton too enthusiastically. Indeed, they might usefully reflect on Clinton in a rather unfavourable way. For the man who will stand at the speaker's rostrum in the Winter Gardens today is also among the handful of individuals bearing the greatest personal responsibility for the dangerous and threatening international situation that faces the world today.  One direct reason for this is Clinton's handling of Iraq during his presidential years. The Clinton administration's policy towards Saddam after the 1991 Gulf war was inconsistent, inattentive and, at its worst, opportunist. It ranged from his initial 1993 suggestion that the US might adopt a more relaxed policy towards Iraq - "I'm a Baptist; I believe in deathbed conversions" he told George Stephanopoulos - to the largely futile bombing strikes on Baghdad five years later, just as Clinton was about to face impeachment on Capitol Hill.  So intermittent was Clinton's attention to Iraq that he allowed the issue to become a lightning rod for mounting conservative anger against him. By the time of Clinton's second term, with the Republicans now controlling the Congress, his rightwing enemies had become obsessed with derailing his policy towards Saddam. This climaxed in the successful conservative Republican campaign in 1998 - led by Donald Rumsfeld, Richard Perle and Paul Wolfowitz among others - to persuade Congress to pass the Iraq Liberation Act. The law instructed Clinton to channel money and military aid into Iraqi opposition groups. It baldly stated that US policy was "to support efforts to remove the regime headed by Saddam Hussein from power". Clinton, fighting for political survival over the Monica Lewinsky affair and facing crucial mid-term elections, agreed to sign the Iraq Liberation Act into law in October 1998. It was a key tactical concession, successful in drawing the sting from the issue at a crucial time. But Clinton never took it seriously. The result was that, for Wolfowitz and the rest, a much tougher interventionist stance on Iraq became an almost sacred anti-Clinton cause in the run-up to the 2000 Bush-Gore election. Under Bush, Perle promised the Senate in 2000, there would be a "serious and sustained effort" to bring down Saddam. Now, in 2002, it is happening.  Clinton, therefore, bears a share of responsibility for helping to make the overthrow of Saddam such an article of dogma among the rightwing Republicans around Bush. He also did more than almost anyone to ensure that Bush could defeat Gore in 2000, an election which ought to have been a shoo-in for the Democrats in normal political circumstances. Clinton's affair with Lewinsky, and all that followed from it, helped to cripple the Gore campaign and allowed Bush to present himself as a candidate offering a new start.  For all his many strengths, Clinton's most important current legacy to America and the world is the vengeful and driven administration that now occupies the White House. In this sense, Clinton is not the answer to the world's most acute international problems, but their part-author. A standing ovation for Bill? Forgive me if I sit this one out.