Even before September 11, America was not a nation at ease with death. It is not unique in that. Uptight Britain has its own taboos too, as do all other nations. Yet a society as dominated by entertainment and hedonism as America finds it especially difficult to contemplate real dead people, as opposed to the kind you see in movies and computer games, where mass extinction is routinely presented with moral and emotional disengagement. Which is why Six Feet Under, the next American television series to hit our screens, is so extraordinary.  You do not have to spend much time in the US before you realise that, for all its gun laws and its capital punishment, or perhaps even because of them, this is a society in an advanced stage of denial about death. This is the society, remember, whose development of "smart" bombs means that it fights wars in which nobody, Americans in particular, can be seen to get killed.  And this is a society which, to a degree unprecedented in human history, is dedicated to investing in the flipside of death denial, the illusion of permanent youth. America's fanaticism about exercise, its preoccupation with cosmetic surgery and its love affair with botox can all be seen as manifestations of this Faustian denial of truth and time. "You can have the body you want," says an unusually mendacious but culturally representative ad for the Bally fitness company. Except that in the long run, as Keynes might have said, it will always be a dead one.  American television is particularly dedicated to maintaining this illusion. In a land dominated by "bobos" - the bourgeois Bohemians of David Brooks's searing account of America's baby-boom upper-class mores - and whose television is aimed principally at affluent teenagers with zilch interest in the meaning of life, there is little room for the meaning of death. Americans may be the most overweight people in the world, but you wouldn't know it from watching their television. Like American life, this is unremittingly (and, to this Brit at least, refreshingly) optimistic. But it is populated by people who are overwhelmingly young, overwhelmingly healthy and who overwhelmingly have fantastic abs.  Six Feet Under, which debuts on Channel 4 on Monday, turns all of this on its head. It is the first television drama to be unremittingly frank about death and its effects. That's partly because it is an everyday story of undertaking folk - or morticians, as Americans call them. But it's also because Six Feet Under is not a drama series about a bunch of people who merely happen to be undertakers.  The storylines are often zany, but the relentless leitmotif is of loss and death. Every episode begins with someone dying. But that's literally only the start. The rest of the programme dwells mesmerisingly on the business of death as practised by Fisher &amp; Sons, a funeral home run by a grippingly dysfunctional LA family.  The weekly raw material ranges from the tools and potions of embalming to the multifarious impacts of bereavement on the Fishers' customers, as well as the toll on the Fishers themselves of trying to revive their ailing family business while staving off the predatory takeover efforts of one of the big national mortuary chains.  It is an uncommonly serious drama series, and the camera is surprisingly unswerving as it lingers over the bodies on the mortuary slab and what is being done to them. Nevertheless the humour of Six Feet Under is also dark and powerful. Each of the surviving Fisher adult children perpetually engages with private demons - David with his gay sexuality, Nate with his girlfriend's manic depressive brother, and Claire with her troubled boyfriend's drug dependency. Their mother Ruth, meanwhile, comes out about her affair with her hairdresser.  When we think about the American way of death, many of us probably think of Jessica Mitford's 1963 book of the same name. Mitford peeled away the veils surrounding the American mortuary business, mocking its repertoire of euphemisms, its money-grabbing and its prolongation of a process which the no-nonsense English aristocrat turned no-nonsense Bay Area leftie thought should be brisk, efficient and functional. But while Mitford slashed her target into pieces, she nevertheless failed to come up with an adequate answer to the big question: how should we behave when someone dies?  Six Feet Under may not have that answer either. But it certainly keeps asking the question. It is a remarkable achievement for HBO, the channel that first commissioned it, and for an American television industry which is routinely assumed here to be incapable of rising above crime, sex, sitcoms and easy ratings. It says something pretty impressive about the seriousness of America. And it is hard to imagine Britain, forever glibly condescending about American culture, getting anywhere near it.