From this side of the ocean, America gives an unmistakable impression of being "the nation united" that so many of its citizens regularly invoke in their daily pledge of allegiance to the flag. The polls show overwhelming support for a US military response. The president enjoys record approval ratings, up 35% since the bombers struck. The national mood has surged up and over Capitol Hill. The previously divided Congress, which George Bush addressed in joint session last night, has suddenly become an infinitely compliant bipartisan body after months of angry inter-party manoeuvring. Last week the senate voted by 98-0 to give the president wide powers to lead the American response, while the House of Representatives followed suit by 420-1.  Since September 11, indeed, the Congress has twice responded to White House emergency funding calls by going far further than Bush had asked it to. At the weekend, asked for $20bn in emergency funding, the Congress promptly gave $40bn. Yesterday, they came up with a $24bn aid package for the airline industry, which more than doubled what the administration was asking for.  Nothing, though, better illustrates the post-September 11 political mood in Washington than the announcement this week from the senate Democrats that they are dropping all efforts to restrict and scrutinise the Bush administration's missile defence plans. In the three months since they took control of the senate earlier this year, the Democrats had gradually and skilfully begun to challenge the president's missile shield theology and planning. Their most senior leaders - Tom Daschle, Dick Gephardt and Joe Biden - had all made critical speeches about the missile shield's impact. They had inserted clauses into the Pentagon budget to ensure that congressional approval would be needed for any spending which might breach the 1971 anti-ballistic missile treaty. On Wednesday, the Democrats promptly dropped them.   Ever since September 11, in other words, the Democrats have decided that they have no alternative but to support anything and everything that the president proposes. In the current national mood, one senate aide said this week, the party "is trying to head off every partisan issue it can". For the moment, courtesy of the bombers, George Bush is the complete master of the domestic political arena.  One should not belittle the reasons which have brought this about. Americans believe that they are the innocent victims of a monstrous wrong - and they are correct. With the bodies still unrecovered in the rubble of lower Manhattan, the nation   has inevitably drawn together in grief, shock and outrage. As in all wars, real or imagined, speaking out of line carries a heavy political penalty.  Yet, while politics in much of the rest of the democratic world grapples with the options and attempts to weigh the wisdom and consequences of particular courses of action - a process which is also taking place inside the US administration itself - American democracy seems intellectually paralysed and unable to play a role which is vitally necessary for both the US and the wider world.  It is not true, in fact, that all Americans are of one mind about what the US should do now. From the White House itself, down to more than 150 college campuses across the US which took days of action for "peaceful justice" yesterday, there is debate of one sort or another taking place in America. On the streets too, there is a marginal but articulate anti-war movement. The polls themselves do not show total unanimity. In the American newspapers, serious commentators of right   and left are also weighing the issues in very much the same way that they are here. Yesterday's International Herald Tribune contained six pieces which discussed in one way or another the dilemmas and nuances that are preoccupying all of us.  The one place where we hear nothing of this debate, however, is in the American political arena. It's not that there are suddenly no differences there, just that they are not being aired. Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, for example, a decorated Vietnam veteran who led the Vets Against the War movement in the 1960s, is one who is prepared to caution against US action but who will not run the risk of putting his vote where his mouth is. "If all you do is create a lot of innocent victims and wind up with a more radical Islamic state in Pakistan with nuclear weapons, are you safer?" Kerry asks. "We have an obligation to ask those questions. Patriotism isn't blind." Exactly. But Kerry is eyeing a run for the White House in 2004, so he says these things in the Boston Globe rather than on the senate floor. Ten days have now passed since the attack. Politics has moved on to a debate about responses. So where are the American internationalists when we need them most?