Maybe it was the different format this time. Maybe it was the pressing
urgency, from Al Gore's point of view, for a more effective performance.
Maybe it was simply the fact that this was the two presidential candidates'
last chance to define themselves for that part of the television viewing
public that was not preoccupied with watching the New York Yankees victory in
baseball's American League pennant race last night.Whatever the reason, Mr Gore and George W Bush produced the most combative
and interesting debate of their three televised encounters when they sparred
for the last time in St Louis last night, just three weeks before one of the
two men is elected US president to succeed Bill Clinton.Unlike its predecessor debates in Boston and Winston-Salem, this third
Debate, held on the campus of Washington University, featured "real live voters", asking questions to the two men in a format which Americans call a town hall meeting. The questions went through almost
all of the big issues, with the striking exception of abortion. Foreign
policy was mentioned, but only briefly and somewhat generally, unlike in the
second debate, where it was the dominant theme. For the most part, last
night's debate was a classic confrontation about bread-and-butter domestic
issues like tax, education, health and farming.Mr Gore, as before, was full of facts on whatever question he was called to
answer. This time, though, he toned down the use of figures, probably wisely
since they got him into trouble in the first debate. In general, however, Mr Gore
clearly reverted to the more aggressive style of the Boston debate, though
without the "sighs and lies" that subsequently undermined what had appeared
to be a winning performance.Mr Bush, as before, was more generalised, more scripted and yet somehow
also more relaxed. He revealed once again a real talent for the apparently
easeful, which is highly attractive to some watchers, but he was put under
more pressure this time than before, both by Mr Gore and by some of the questioners, notably in an exchange on the death penalty.After more than four hours of debates between the two men, the issue
between them came back once more to taxation and spending. Mr Bush tried his
hardest to portray Mr Gore as a big spender and a big government man, and warned
that the money wasn't there. Mr Gore, for his part, took his stand on the issue
which has always seemed to be the most important of all for him, American
prosperity, and cautioned that Mr Bush would have to choose between tax cuts and
education spending.Are you better off than you were eight years ago, Mr Gore asked the
audience, echoing Ronald Reagan's election-winning question from 1980. Aides
made clear that in the final leg of the campaign, Mr Gore intends to make this
the central theme.Mr Bush's central theme was more opaque, although the number of times he
mentioned Washington DC as the embodiment of  everything that he thinks is
wrong with America made it clear that voters are responding to Mr Bush's
portrayal of himself as a fresh outsider.The instant polls of watching viewers scored this final debate narrowly,
but clearly to Mr Gore. That seemed to be the general view in the notoriously
unreliable press room too. Certainly, the Gore camp professed itself well
satisfied with their man's showing in the 90-minute debate.With his opinion poll lead consolidating at around three or four points,
Mr Bush is the man in command at present. If Mr Gore begins to narrow the gap by
the end of the week though, this most volatile election of modern times
could start undergoing yet another change.In the end, however, the most striking thing about last night's third
debate was not who "won" or "lost", but that both of the candidates succeeded
in spelling out their basic differences of philosophy, policy and style
across a wide range of subjects. By doing so, Gore and Bush have surely
succeeded in setting a clear choice before the voters in the last three weeks
of campaigning before the November 7 election.There were those who thought that last night's debate should not go ahead
at all, out of respect for Missouri Governor Mel Carnahan, who died in a
plane crash near St Louis just 24 hours beforehand. There were those who
thought that the debate would be inhibited by the tragedy. In the event, there was no postponement, partly at the urging of the governor's widow. It was the right decision, and it is hard to imagine that the proceedings were affected at all.