The cult of the individual is normally part of the political culture of communist regimes or other dictatorships. But the supporters of Ronald Reagan are doing their best to install just such a cult at the heart of the world's most powerful democracy.Not content with ensuring that Washington's domestic airport is named after their hero, or with renaming the capital city's international conference centre after him too, supporters of the former president are now poised to win congressional approval for a law that would instruct the US government to erect a Ronald Reagan memorial on the Mall, right in the centre of Washington.The plan to honour a living politician in this way would not seem out of place in North Korea or Iraq. But it is unprecedented in all American history and it would place Reagan among the most publicly esteemed and honoured of all US leaders.Only George Washington, who founded the nation, Thomas Jefferson, who wrote its constitution, Abraham Lincoln, who saved it, and Franklin Roosevelt, who led it through economic depression and world war, have been thought worthy enough to merit national memorials on the Mall.In each case however, the memorials to these presidents were only proposed, approved and erected long after their deaths and after later generations had had time to weigh the leaders' long-term legacy more dispassionately than their immediate contemporaries could trust themselves to do.The Washington Monument was not begun until 1848. Work on the Lincoln Memorial began in 1912. Authorisation for the Jefferson Memorial was enacted in 1934, while the Roosevelt Memorial was opened only in 1997. In each case, nearly half a century had passed since the death of the memorialised president - and more than a century in the case of Jefferson.The idea that Reagan is uniquely entitled to more privileged treatment is bizarre. Now stricken with Alzheimer's, Reagan was a personally charming president whose principal achievement was to make a generation of Americans feel good about themselves. His substantive legacy is much harder to quantify, and the idea that he should be numbered among these other indisputably historic leaders - and in his own lifetime too - owes nothing to consensus or objectivity, and everything to a fanatical campaign among conservative Republicans determined to raise Reagan into this select company.The Reagan Legacy Project, which has its headquarters in Washington, states without any qualification that "Ronald Reagan was America's greatest president". Its aim is to ensure "naming something significant after President Reagan in each of the 50 states and in every county of America."Among the achievements it claims so far are everything from a US Navy aircraft carrier, the USS Ronald Reagan, which is due for completion in 2002, to the Ronald Reagan Fundamental school in Yuma, Arizona. Other commemorations include the Ronald Reagan professorship at California's Pepperdine University, the college which invited the former independent counsel Kenneth Starr to become its principal, and the Ronald Reagan Foundation for Conservative Studies at the Texas A&M University in Bryan, Texas, also home to the George Bush Presidential library.Some supporters of the project make clear that they will not be truly content until they have had a head of President Reagan added to the Mount Rushmore monument in the Black Hills of South Dakota, where Presidents Washington, Jefferson, Lincoln and Theodore Roosevelt are commemorated.To achieve their goal of a Reagan memorial on the Mall, Republicans have drafted a bill which brushes aside all existing procedures and checks and balances for commemorations in the capital. Until now, proposals for memorials have had to be submitted to three separate federal commissions for consideration and - in some cases - rejection. The most recently accepted memorial under this procedure is one in honour of Martin Luther King, the design for which was unveiled this week. But the commissions have already warned against the danger of a proliferation of monuments in the US capital, and have agreed to a moratorium, designed in part to protect existing vistas, but also to slow the politicisation of the process, of which the Reagan memorial is now the prime exhibit.The Reagan memorial bill bypasses these commissions, putting the whole issue in the hands of a Ronald Reagan Memorial Commission. The objective is as clear as it would be if this were Pyongyang or Baghdad rather than Washington. No disagreements, no delays, no doubts are to be tolerated. Dissent is un-American.The continuing Republican cult of Reagan bears many similarities - though the American version is much more enduring - to Britain's supposed love affair with Margaret Thatcher at the same period. Paradoxically, though, the Reagan cult was given fresh energy by the election of Bill Clinton in 1992, an event which appalled conservatives and made them more determined than ever to ensure that their own years of triumph were not forgotten.One day, believe it or not, there will be plans for a Clinton monument in Washington. Even to imagine the theme - and the shape - of such a memorial is to open up a subject best kept closed at present. But it is as powerful a vindication as one could wish for of the old system that the Republicans are trying to overthrow. Decisions about such commemorations are best left to the judgment of later generations.