Turning points are generally more obvious in retrospect than when they take place, but if Al Gore wins the race for the White House this November, then he is going to look back to these middle days of August as the moment when the tide turned in his favour. Things began looking up for Gore when he chose Joe Lieberman as his running mate. They got better when Gore exceeded expectations in his  acceptance speech to the Democratic convention last week. That passionate kiss with his wife Tipper before the start of his speech was the most noticed event of the convention season. Now, in the week since the Los Angeles convention, Gore has taken the political contest to George W Bush for the first time, and has been rewarded both by signs of Republican vulnerability and by a healthy boost in the opinion polls.     Returning to the campaign trail after the traditional pause during his opponent's convention, George W Bush has failed to find his rhythm. After months as the frontrunner, perhaps he has become complacent, but the contrast between Bush's light schedule this week and Gore's strong campaigning performance in the Midwest and Florida has been palpable. Bush did not quite seem to have his heart in it. He seemed too relaxed, talking too readily about enjoying his week off. He has fumbled his words. Worst of all, he has let Gore dictate the agenda. Bush had intended these last days of summer campaigning to be about education. With schools and colleges about to reassemble for the new  academic year, education is on many Americans' minds. Gore made two solid, focused pitches on the subject this week - the first on pre-school education, the second on tax breaks for the parents of college students. But Bush found himself pushed off the subject, forced to defend remarks on American military readiness that suddenly seemed mean-spirited, compelled to issue repeated clarifications on his tax plans, and wrong-footed over an attack ad against Gore which was hastily withdrawn on Wednesday. Bush was in the quintessential middle America town of Peoria, Illinois, this week when he made what could be the most damaging mistake of the three. Conscious that his $1.6 trillion (£1.1 trillion) tax cut continues to be seen as a rich man's charter by the Democrats - as it was in the spring by John McCain - Bush sought out a group of the travelling press corps to try to explain his plans in more favourable detail. The result was a spectacular own goal, full of non sequiturs and opacity, which required urgent rescue work by Bush aides as the day wore on. "I've got to do a better job of making it clear," Bush told the reporters, "that starting with a baseline of about $1.9 trillion over the next 10 years, the budgets will increase by about $3.3 trillion. And yet you've still got another $2.3 trillion of surplus. I think that when people understand that we've got a lot of money that we'll apply to different programmes, that the tax relief package will become even more, people will buy into the tax relief package even more." Got that? No? Well, the reporters didn't either. The whole episode triggered a distinctly unfavourable couple of days of coverage for Bush, not at all what the high command was looking for. Mockery has begun to edge out respect in the coverage of the Bush campaign. "Reactive and not entirely coherent," reported the New York Times. Anyone can have a bad week, of course, but this is a bad time to have one. Gore is suddenly on form. He had already taken the lead in the national polls even before Los Angeles - the Lieberman factor presumably - and he has pushed further ahead this week. Yesterday, four new polls in important states all showed Gore ahead of Bush - by two points in Michigan, by eight in Minnesota, by 12 in New Jersey, and by 13 in California. And Gore and Lieberman spent Wednesday in Florida, where the choice of Jewish Joe has ignited fierce enthusiasm among the Jewish retiree vote who make up 6% of the state's electorate. Suddenly, Bush is on the defensive.There are nearly 80 days to go, of course, so this is just the start. Nevertheless, Bush is looking rattled on two other looming issues - the presidential debates, where he is squirming to avoid traditional stand-up contests in favour of cosy chats with Larry King round a TV studio table, and the congressional budget negotiations on Capitol Hill, where Bill Clinton is quietly playing a unnoticed blinder, manoeuvring the Republican leadership into a confrontation which resurrects all the associations that Bush is desperate to keep well buried until November 7.Election day is still a long way off. But Labour Day, traditional start of the real campaign, is just 10 days distant. In all but two of the presidential contests since opinion polling began in 1936, the candidate who led on Labour Day was the candidate who won two months later on election day (the exceptions were Truman in 1948 and Kennedy in 1960). Rules are there to be broken, but right now, it looks as though Bush could be trailing on September 4 and that Al Gore will be the favourite after all.