Joe Lieberman of Connecticut could be the key that unlocks the 2000 US presidential election for the Democrats.If that turns out to be true, then it will be one of the more improbable transformations in modern American politics.   Less than two weeks ago, Mr Lieberman was a relatively obscure, generally conservative Democrat senator, known to the public mainly because if his prominent  criticism of president Bill Clinton during the impeachment crisis, and known to the Washington press corps mainly as an honest and interesting, but marginal,  figure within his own party.   Last night, though, thousands of delegates in the Staples Centre greeted the little man from Connecticut as a conquering hero when he delivered a smart, upbeat and generally well-judged acceptance speech to the Democratic Convention in Los Angeles. It must have been by far the largest audience that Mr Lieberman has ever addressed, and although he still seems stunned by the transformation of the past fortnight, it was an obvious success.   He entered to the music from Chariots of Fire, greeted the audience with an improbable clenched fist salute and started his speech with a Jewish mother-in-law joke. But in contrast to his campaign appearances last week, this time Mr Lieberman dwelled only lightly on religious themes or the  significance of his selection to American Jews and immigrants.   It was a speech which set out to do four things. First, it had to introduce the still largely unknown Mr Lieberman to the wider national audience in a rare prime-time television opportunity. Second, it had to help promote Al Gore's generally lack-lustre public image - a major theme of this third day of the Democratic convention.   Beyond these core tasks, the speech had to fulfil two potentially contradictory aims. It had to win the support of the black American electorate, a crucial Democratic base, but one which cannot be counted on to support a Jewish candidate. Simultaneously, the speech had to reach out beyond the party, to independent and undecided voters who needed to be given some reasons for preferring Gore-Lieberman to the Republicans'  Bush-Cheney ticket.   The first two objectives were easily fulfilled, Americans have no excuse for not knowing the key elements in the Lieberman narrative these days - the modest background in Connecticut, the days in the civil rights movement  campaigning to register black voters, the abiding importance of his mother Marcia, the marriage to Hadassah Freilich, a daughter of Holocaust survivors, the assaults on Hollywood's debauched standards, then the attack on Mr Clinton over the Lewinsky affair.   Last night the television audience heard nice stories from and about Joe Lieberman. And no one tuning in to the Democratic convention could doubt that he supports and promotes Mr Gore. After meeting the vice-president on one occasion, Mr Lieberman's young daughter said "He must be a daddy". Al Gore's virtues as a father were a constant theme of yesterday's  sessions.  Politically, though, there were other jobs to do. "Let me just speak to those of you at home who haven't made up your mind if you want to build on our prosperity," Mr Lieberman said, before highlighting bi-partisanship and   political reform as two key areas tailored to appeal to independents. "I  respectfully say to you that Al Gore and I are the guys who are ready to do  the job," he said, At various points in his speech, Mr Lieberman praised Republican leaders like Ronald Reagan. He stressed his senate reputation as an "across the aisle"  legislator, who had worked with Republicans in the past and who was happy to do so again. "Our opponents are decent and likeable men," he said. "I am pleased to call many in their party my friends." He praised "my dear friend John McCain" - the Arizona senator was diagnosed with skin cancer yesterday -   and labelled him a great man.   In the coming election, this appeal to the centre and to independents will  surely be one of Mr Lieberman's responsibilities. The senator's quirky and unconventional voting record has raised some questions - especially among  black leaders - about whether he will win over their support. In two warm-up  speeches congressmen Robert Menendez, a Latino from New Jersey, and the formidable John Lewis of Georgia, who is black, fought to promote Mr Lieberman's  anti-racist record. Meanwhile the man himself went out of his way to restate his support for affirmative action, as he had also done earlier at a meeting with the congressional black caucus.   At the end, the Liebermans were bustled off the stage to prepare the way for Karenna Gore and Tommy Lee Jones to nominate Mr Gore for the election, and later for Mr Gore to make a surprise appearance himself, prior to being formally adopted. But the impact that the senator has made on the polls in just a few days has been good for the Democrats, and yesterday's speech is surely destined to push the party forward still further, as Mr Lieberman road tests his own considerable assets under campaign conditions.