In American Rhapsody, his excellent new book on the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal,   the writer Joe Eszterhas makes the case that Bill Clinton is not just the   first rock 'n' roll US president, he is also the Mick Jagger of politics. So it was wholly appropriate that last night, in the Staples Centre in Los   Angeles, Bill Clinton's managers lifted, without apology, a gimmick from the   most recent Rolling Stones tour. As the stage darkened and the audience   sensed that the star's entrance was near, a video clicked on, modelled   precisely on the one the Stones used to orchestrate their own entrance a year   or so ago. Down an extravagantly long hallway came the ageing legend, slowly walking   nearer and nearer to the camera. Then, as the music grew louder and   the cheering less restrained, the iconic figure almost seamlessly moved out   of the video and on to the stage, a shamelessly theatrical entrance. The   audience loved it. Jumping Bill Flash was back. But Clinton is not only a rock star. He is also the central character in   a political soap opera that has held America spellbound for almost eight   years. At the end of the last series, Bill and Hillary and daughter Chelsea   almost split apart. The defining shot of the final episode was of the   strained, stiff, don't-be-fooled image of the three central characters   walking across the White House lawn hand in hand, jaws set. Would they   survive? Most thought not, but only time would tell. Well, as in all durable soaps, the Clintons of course survived. And last   night was the counterpoint to those grim endings in 1998, before Monica   Lewinsky was written out of the script. As Clinton finished his speech, he   was joined on stage by Hillary and Chelsea yet again. This time the   strain was gone. It was all hugs and kisses and smiles. As another curtain   falls, the Clintons will all live happily ever after - or maybe not. Last night was Clinton's bid to be taken seriously. His speech to the   first night of the Democratic convention was a plea to his detractors that   his presidency was not, like Seinfeld, a show about nothing. On the contrary. Clinton pitched his claims high. He was the figurehead of "the New Democratic   agenda that has taken our country to new heights of prosperity, progress and   peace." He clearly felt he had nothing to apologise for, and this time he   apologised for nothing. In the hall, hundreds of delegates deliriously waved   placards bearing an unequivocal tribute to this most ambiguous of   politicians: "Thank you, President Clinton". If you are one of those who simply cannot take Clinton seriously, this   farewell speech was simply hot air on a torrid southern California evening.   But if instead you are one of those who sees Clinton at least in part as he   sees himself, as a politician who is engaged in a historic task of redefining   and re-applying the progressive legacy of the twentieth century, then this   valedictory speech was an irresistible mix of high seriousness and   questionable aesthetics. Clinton's speech made huge claims. Some of them were laundry list claims   - inflation down, jobs up, crime down, educational achievement up, and a lot   more. Some list. Others were vintage rhetorical Clinton. "The stars have   never shone more brightly on any people at any time". America was "more   hopeful, more secure, more free" than at any time in its history. It was   closer than ever to "the America of our dreams."   For a man who is bowing out, it was extraordinarily confident stuff. There were all the references to Al Gore than any Gore lieutenant could   possibly have demanded, but you could not miss the fact that here   was a master politician quitting at the top of his game. If he was allowed to   stand for more than two terms, he would unquestionably be doing so, and all   Al Gore's excellent qualities would be as nothing. And if he were standing,   Clinton would, of course, be re-elected. He ended as he began eight years ago, quoting the Fleetwood Mac number   that became his theme song in the 1992 election. "Don't stop thinking about   tomorrow." He is an impossibly tough act to follow, and Gore has an   unenviable task on Thursday when arrives to claim the crown. By then, Clinton   will be far away. As Los Angeles awakes this morning, Clinton is already far   away en route to Michigan and the symbolic handover to Gore. The great speech   was yesterday, and as the next line of the Fleetwood Mac song says,   yesterday's gone.  <B>Useful links</B><BR>Democrat convention 2000 speech transcripts