The Republican national convention in Philadelphia embodied George W Bush's  party strategy, and Bush's speech on the final night in turn embodied the convention. The speech, like the convention, was a slick, impressive effort. But, like   the convention, it tried to have it both ways. Another of the week's   unacknowledged tributes to Bill Clinton, you might say. Bush's speech made very bold claims indeed. His aim was nothing less than   to "renew America's purpose", he said in his third sentence. It was "a time   for new beginnings". The Democrats were "facing something new" - a Republican   party which had redefined itself as the party of "ideas and innovation",   "idealism and inclusion". If all this sounded awfully like Bill Clinton, then that was because the   speech, like the convention, was a straight lift from the Clinton playbook -   but with one big exception. In 1992 and more recently, Clinton took on his party. He challenged the   Democrats to confront not just their run of defeats but the reasons why they   had been defeated. He ran overtly as a different kind of Democrat, defying   the party shibboleths on issues from trade to race, and forcing his party to   choose between electoral failure and electoral success. Like Clinton in 1992 and 1996, Bush offers American voters a new model of   his own party, But whereas Clinton confronted the Democrats, Bush is trying   to use finesse on the Republicans. He calls himself a compassionate conservative,   and did so again last night, but his strategy is to be compassionate to   people who value compassion and conservative to people whose priorities are   conservative. The Republican convention, which ended last night in Philadelphia, also had   two very different faces. To television viewers who saw only what took place   in the hall, it offered a radically new Republican face, multi-cultural,   inclusive, caring and sharing. To lobbyists and corporations attending some   of the nearly 500 networking and influence-peddling events that took place   away from the convention centre, the convention offered an orgy of favours   and special interests. Given the extent of the political-commercial interface   in evidence in Philadelphia, it would not be an exaggeration to describe the   public convention as an organised lie. That contrast was also manifest in the political messages of the   convention, In the hall, all was warmth and tone. But the Republican party   platform adopted at Philadelphia remains an overwhelmingly conservative   document, far removed from the pragmatic and bipartisan tone of the week's   speeches. Bush's own speech could not resolve this dilemma. It contained powerful   sections and potent themes, casting the Republican party as the party of all   the people and Bush himself as a national conciliator. But it also contained   trenchantly conservative pronouncements which no amount of spin-doctoring   could disguise. Yes, Bush offered a volley of Clintonian rhetoric about the nation being   "daring and decent and ready for change". And yes, Bush's speech proclaimed   the Republicans as the party of reform, not the party of repose. Yes, he   also pronounced a plague on partisans of both parties, offering himself up as a man with "no stake in the bitter arguments of the   last few years".Moreover, as the speech ended and the first of 150,000 balloons began to   descend to the convention floor from the rafters, Bush was joined on stage by   a gallery of friends, relations and political colleagues. John McCain was   there, along with Pennsylvania governor Tom Ridge and House speaker Dennis   Hastert. But of Tom DeLay, Dick Armey, Dan Burton, Jesse Helms, Trent Lott   and Henry Hyde there was nothing to be seen. If ever there was an opportunity   to define the Republican Party afresh then here it was. Yet the speech, like the convention itself, had two different faces.   Alongside the warm words were harsh ones. Many of the biggest cheers of the   evening came as Bush reiterated conservative positions which did nothing to   challenge the party to change. No new gun laws. Lots of tax cuts. A   commitment to sign a law banning so-called "partial birth" abortion. A fresh   emphasis on religion. National missile defences whether they work or not. Not   a word about big business, the international situation or the ultimate   unmentionable of the week - impeachment. Bush has skilfully put together a movement designed to place Bill Clinton   firmly in his political grave. Many of his comments about Clinton were   irresistibly to the point. The polls also show Bush may well win. But by   offering so many concessions to the party rightwing, his speech may have   contained the seeds not of Bush's victory, but of his defeat.