As he roared around America on his Straight Talk Express during the   Republican primaries this spring, John McCain must have allowed himself to   dream about the speech he might end up making to the party   convention in Philadelphia if he won the nomination. In his dreams, McCain must have imagined himself coming to Philadelphia at   the head of a populist revolt to bury George W Bush's complacent assumption   that the Republican nomination was his to inherit. Last night, McCain faced   the ultimate reality check. He strode to the podium in the Republican   convention hall not to bury Dubya but to praise him. The endorsement has been a long time coming but, once he got started, the   tributes poured from McCain's mouth. By the end the formal reconciliation   between two rivals who had spent so long attacking one another   was complete. At times it seemed like one of those forced confessions that   McCain's Vietnamese jailers never got him to make. McCain called Bush his friend. He said Bush was a leader of courage and   character. He praised Bush for his "one-nation" views. "I support him. I am   grateful to him. And I am proud of him," McCain said. He even seemed to imply   he was ready to serve in a Bush administration, a thought which the Bush camp   would never seriously entertain. It was hard not to wonder whether a single   word of the tributes was true. Back in February and March, McCain's often inspired grassroots campaign   reached out beyond core Republican voters to capture the support of   independents and Democrats. Occasionally - as in the New Hampshire and   Michigan primaries in particular - there were hints of the emergence of a new   alliance in American politics, one that the Arizona senator eagerly dubbed   "the McCain majority".In the event though, Bush rallied the party and drove   his challenger from the field. Now it is Bush who faces the daunting task of   building a new Republican majority. Even so, McCain could hardly be denied his moment at the convention. His   wins in the spring entitled him to the primetime speaking slot that he got   last night. Beforehand, the Bush campaign was nervous that the independent and   proud McCain might ignite the first row of a strictly scripted week by   repeating his primary campaign attacks on party conservatives or by thumping   the tub on behalf of his long commitment to campaign finance reform. What they got was McCain on his best behaviour. It was a serious speech,   full of high idealism and hopes, but curiously low-key throughout. There was   nothing to annoy the right, and not even a mention of campaign finance. The   closest it came to controversy was an appeal to be "a little less content"   and to "get riled up a bit".But the speech neither sought nor received the   tumultuous reception which the Bush camp must have feared. Only one triumph   is permitted in Philadelphia this week. If Bush stumbles in November, they   won't be able to blame McCain, even though the McCain 2004 speculation will   become instantly intense if he does.McCain may still have a role to play in his party's future, though he is 63   now and time is getting short. Last night, he seemed to be less part of the   Republican future than of the Republican past, his speech climaxing an   evening which paid treacly tribute to a succession of the party's veteran   VIPs.There were tributes to Gerald Ford, who was there, and George Bush Sr, who   was on hand once again to represent his son, who is campaigning his way   towards Philadelphia, where he arrives before lunchtime today. Nancy Reagan   took a bow for the blighted Ronnie. Bob Dole spoke briefly, as did his wife   Elizabeth - another who had once hoped for a more exciting role to play in   Philadelphia. Even Barbara Bush had a turn. It must have been hard for McCain to find himself embraced as a veteran on   the edge of political retirement. But his speech was unmistakeably   valedictory. "I will not see what is over America's horizon", he said. It was a   disconcerting phrase and, after a low-key ending, McCain left the podium   quickly. The curtain has finally fallen on what might have been, and the   stage stands ready for Bush tomorrow night.