It has become fashionable to knock the American political conventions. "Yawn," announced a world-weary Los Angeles Times editorial this week, "Where 
are the hotly contested nominations of past years?" That's true enough as far as it goes. If a hot contest is synonymous with a good convention, then the Democrats haven't had one since 1952, when Adlai Stevenson only took the nomination on the third ballot, and the Republicans haven't had one since 1948, when Thomas E Dewey had to wait until the third round too. It's also true that it is a few years since a convention was consumed by a good old-fashioned political argument. The Democrats had one in New York back in 1980, when pro-Jimmy Carter delegates spent 17 hours battling over Ted Kennedy's jobs programme. The Republicans have to go back to 1964 for a party-splitting convention, when the pro-Barry Goldwater forces fought off an attempt by moderates to pledge the party to state election voting rights for black Americans. These days, the conventions are much more homogeneous affairs. When the Republicans gather in Philadelphia next week, and when the Democrats meet in Los Angeles two weeks later, the dictates of modern campaigning will dominate.No public arguments will scare the voters. Instead, scripted unity will prevail. A succession of carefully showcased pseudo-events will be organised to capture the television news and to exploit the limited primetime network live coverage.A leavening of celebrities and "ordinary
folks" will make the professional politicians more palatable to the channel-hopping era. The Republicans will put General Colin Powell on for Monday's primetime slot. On Tuesday, it will be the turn of another of the party's few African-American stars, Condoleezza Rice, followed by John McCain (fingers firmly crossed in the Bush camp for those 20 minutes). Wednesday brings vice-presidential nominee Dick Cheney, before George W Bush accepts the presidential nomination in the Thursday slot. In between, we will get to hear Norman Schwarzkopf and Elizabeth Dole. Mel Gibson has been invited to bring Patriot fever to the city most associated with the American revolution. And Bush's fellow Texan Lance Armstrong, back-to-back winner of the Tour de France, may roll into town, the organisers hope. Watch out for Bush in the yellow jersey. The people we won't hear from next week will be significant by their marginalisation. No Newt Gingrich. No Tom DeLay. No Pat Robertson. No Charlton Heston. Apparently no Henry Hyde. Possibly not even Trent Lott. It will be as though the congressional Republican party of the years 1992 to 2000 had never existed.When we get to Los Angeles in mid-August, the Democrats will put their best face to the world too. Bill Clinton speaks on day one - and then leaves the City of Angels to Al Gore. Ditto Hillary Clinton. This year's Tuesday tearjerker moment will be the speech of Caroline Kennedy, daughter of JFK and Jackie, sister of John Jr, speaking in the first party convention to be held in Los Angeles since the Democrats nominated her father back in 1960 - now that was a dirty convention. Wednesday will belong to the as-yet-unrevealed Democratic vice-presidential candidate and to the increasingly influential Karenna Gore. Tipper and Al themselves will round things off on the Thursday. Such a high level of stage management will inevitably tempt some to concentrate on the fringes where demonstrators will be out in force, as will Arianna Huffington and her bizarre "shadow conventions". The convention organisers' nightmare is that the Philadelphia and Los Angeles police departments - neither of them renowned for their subtle approach to policing - will create a more photogenic story on the streets than anything the delegates can muster in the halls. But when all is said and done, the conventions still count. They are pivotal events in the marathon contest for the White House. In presidential elections since 1964, all conventions bar two have helped the candidates. This year, in a tight race between two parties which stand for very different visions of America, the "battle for the bounce" will matter as much as ever. Don't judge the conventions as old politics that has lost its spice and bite. Judge them as new politics, where enduring issues are contested in ever-changing ways. The conventions may not be what they were back in the Nixon or Johnson years - but hot contests take many forms.