As a former White House chief of staff and a former defence secretary, Dick Cheney may seem like a figure from the political past, but he has always been identified as a man with a big political future.Now, confirmed as George W Bush's running mate, Mr Cheney is an election campaign away from becoming US vice-president in November - and then a step away from the highest office of all.In 1996, he even contemplated a run for the Republican presidential nomination himself - proof positive that Mr Cheney's move from Washington and into the international oil business in Texas was only a temporary one.Mr Cheney is best known internationally for the four years he spent as defence secretary in President George Bush's administration between 1989 and 1993. The central event of those years was the Gulf war, in which Mr Cheney presided over the largest US military operation since Vietnam.For a man with a reputation as a military hawk, Mr Cheney's own Vietnam era record is less belligerent. As a student, he secured five successive draft deferments, including one on the grounds that he had a young family. Mr Cheney and his wife Lynne, who was his high school sweetheart, have two daughters.But Mr Cheney has long been seen as a political high-flyer. At 26, he was hired by Richard Nixon's White House to work on anti-inflation policy. At 33, as a protege of another former defence secretary, Donald Rumsfeld, he became Gerald Ford's chief of staff.When Ford was defeated by Jimmy Carter, Mr Cheney went home to Wyoming - he is a graduate of the University of Wyoming - to run for congress. The tough part was the battle to win the Republican nomination, since the sparsely-populated mountain state has only one seat in congress, which is routinely dominated by the Republicans. Though he suffered a mild heart-attack during the campaign - he was only 37 at the time - he won easily, and served six terms in congress.The 1978 heart attack was followed by another in 1984 and a third in 1988. Mr Cheney had quadruple heart bypass surgery in 1988 before taking on the job of defence secretary. Mr Cheney's doctors said this week that he was "up to a strenuous campaign".Mr Cheney's voting record in congress was strictly conservative, but his abilities were quickly recognised in both parties, and he became a key player on Capitol Hill with great ease. By the mid-80s, the influential Almanac of American Politics tipped Mr Cheney as "clearly a major national politician" and a future party leader.He was "the natural candidate of moderates who viscerally prefer a Ford to a Reagan - and the record on issues to be the first choice of a great many Reaganites".That voting record was being pored over by friend and foe alike yesterday, and is certain to become an issue in the upcoming campaign. It includes an absolute opposition, common in Wyoming, to gun control - Mr Cheney was one of only four congressmen to vote against a proposed ban on plastic guns which could foil airport security scanners, a ban which even the National Rifle Association did not oppose.But perhaps the crucial set of votes as far as the November 2000 election is concerned are the ones that Mr Cheney has cast against abortion, against the equal rights act for women in 1983, and against the Head Start education programme for minorities. In an election in which women's support is likely to determine the outcome, Democrats are certain to make maximum use of Mr Cheney's record to paint the Bush-Cheney ticket as conservative on women's issues.Mr Cheney's high level and immensely profitable links with the Texas oil industry - also the source of the Bush family's wealth - will be another big issue in November, not least with environmentalists. Since 1995, he has been chief executive officer and chairman of the Halliburton Corporation, the Dallas based multinational giant which is the world's largest supplier of "energy services" - provision of construction, engineering and maintenance equipment and services to the oil industry.Mr Cheney is understood to have earned around $2m (£1.3m) last year in salary, benefits and options at Halliburton. Last month, profiting spectacularly from the electorally sensitive worldwide increase in oil prices, Mr Cheney sold around 100,000 of his Halliburton shares - approximately half of his personal holding in the company, raising an estimated $5.1m.Another intensely sensitive aspect of the Halliburton connection - which could lead to conflict of interest allegations - is the company's stake in two American oil industry companies, Dresser-Rand and Ingersoll-Dresser Pump Co, which are involved in trying to reconstruct the Iraqi oil industry after the Gulf war. Halliburton also major interests in the Russian oil industry.After Mr Bush won the Republican primary elections this year, Mr Cheney was asked to head the search for a vice-presidential running mate. As recently as last month, Mr Cheney made clear that he did not wish to be considered for the post. But by last week there were clear signs that Mr Bush had managed to change Mr Cheney's mind.