If you believe one report this week, only three people - George W Bush, his  wife Laura and the former defence secretary Dick Cheney - know the identity  of the man, or possibly the woman, who will be Bush's vice-presidential  running mate in November.    According to another report yesterday, the search for Bush's Veep - which  Cheney has been coordinating at the Texas governor's behest for several weeks  - has now been narrowed down to four serious contenders: Governor Frank  Keating of Oklahoma, Governor Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, Senator Chuck Hagel  of Nebraska and Senator Fred Thompson of Tennessee.   A third story says that Bush will make the announcement as early  as next Monday, in order to maximise publicity in the days leading up to the Republican national convention,  which opens in Philadelphia on July 31.    It is perfectly possible that all three stories are true, and that Bush  will indeed tap one of the four names on Cheney's list next week. If this is the   case Ridge would be the most moderate of the choices, Keating the most  conservative and the two senators, both of whom were John McCain supporters  during the primary races, somewhere in the middle.    There is stiffening resistance to Ridge among Republican conservatives  because of his tolerance of abortion rights. But he might be the  electorally clever choice, if the eventual race is as tight as the latest  opinion polls suggest. Two new polls yesterday show Al Gore closing to within  two points of Bush. The contest in November could come down to a close fight  in a handful of key swing states, including Ridge's Pennsylvania.    But don't bet on it. The choice of running mate is the next  key stage in the 2000 US presidential election, and in a contest that has  failed to capture the public imagination so far, both sides believe that the  announcement of who is on the ticket will be crucial to getting the next  bounce in the opinion polls.    For that reason, it is in the parties' interests to stir speculation  about the Veep issue. Over the past week, there have been apparently  authoritative stories linking Bush to Governor George Pataki of New York, a  moderate, and to Congressman John Kasich, the chairman of the House budget  committee and a conservative. Some Washington insiders will tell you  that Senator Dick Lugar of Indiana is still in the frame too. Governor  Christie Whitman of New Jersey, a more liberal   equivalent of Ridge, cannot be wholly ruled out either.   My own guess - and, let's be frank, that is all that it is - would be for  Ridge, if only because everything else that Bush has done in the last two  months has been straight out of the Bill Clinton "How To Win From The Centre"  playbook. Clinton's instinct was to go for a political soulmate. If Bush  follows suit, he will go for a fellow centrist like Ridge.  Al Gore has the luxury of being able to wait and see who his rival selects.  But Gore is likely to act quickly once Bush has chosen. Indeed Gore's  advisers are pressing him to steal some of the Republicans' thunder by  announcing the Democratic number two on August 4, the day after the  Republican convention ends.   Be that as it may, the latest polls will also encourage Gore to go for a  centrist Democrat rather than someone that might balance the ticket in the  traditional pre-Clinton manner. Right on cue, last week's speculation that  Congressman Dick Gephardt was under consideration has evaporated. Everything points to Gore choosing a fellow moderate such as Senator John  Kerry of Massachusetts, a name increasingly mentioned, or his  Senate colleague Joe Lieberman of Connecticut. Governor Jeanne Shaheen of New  Hampshire is surely also in the running.   But, if Gore's assessment is similar to Bush's probable thinking, then he  too will be looking for a party centrist from a state he might not otherwise  win. In that case, Senator Bob Graham of Florida becomes the most logical  choice for the Democratic ticket. But since when were such choices made wholly on  the basis of logic?