The images from Miami that went round the world on Saturday were of fear, chaos, anger and violence. A six-year-old seized at gunpoint in the middle of the night. Distraught relatives shouting defiance at the Clinton administration. Crowds confronting police in the streets of Little Havana. Disturbances in New Jersey and New York. Yesterday, in Washington this time, Elian Gonzalez's Florida relatives relived their anguish yet again, backed by a growing chorus of mainly Republican politicians. A possible general strike looms in Miami.  Placed back to back, as they were on television throughout the Easter weekend, these images play into a view which many Europeans seem to enjoy holding about the United States - that it is a   nation inhabited essentially by mad people, who are ready to erupt and over-react in response to issues which could and should be settled more calmly and honestly. Yet the truth about the Elian affair is that it ought to offer some modest reassurance and encouragement.  What is the essence of the situation, the first world war commander Marshal Foch always used to ask his staff officers during the fog of battle. It was a good question then, and it's a good question now. The essence of the Elian situation is not that the situation is out of hand, but that the Clinton administration has enforced the law so that the boy can be reunited with his father - the objective which most people and all precedent supported - in the face of constant opposition and lack of cooperation from the Miami relatives.   Though the seizure operation on Saturday morning clearly involved the assertion of the US state's power, it was not, despite all the shocking aspects of That Photograph, an unlawful or anarchic act. In a perfect world, the seizure would not have been armed. But to ask the Feds to go unarmed into the Little Havana stockade in which Elian had been held for five months was hardly realistic.  In a country which has more guns than people, in a city which has the third most violent crime rate in the nation, in a community which regards the armed overthrow of the Castro government as a sacred cause, you don't take stupid risks when your goal is to bring a child out quickly and alive.  The Florida relatives are obviously, and understandably, outraged by Saturday's seizure, but a clear majority   of all Americans, all Floridians, and even all Miamians, think that it is right - not wrong - for Elian to be reunited with his father. Even among the Cuban community in Miami, there are many who think the refusal to release Elian to his father was indefensible. They don't say so in public because they are afraid.   American public opinion supports what the government did on Saturday, even after the event. An unscientific, but very large, internet poll on America OnLine yesterday, in which 400,000 people took part, showed 60% approval of Elian's seizure. Most believed that sufficient force was used in carrying it out. Internet polls are normally biased against government, not towards it.   There will be those -there always are - who will grab the opportunity to attack Bill Clinton and the attorney general, Janet Reno, over the way that the operation was carried out. Anything, absolutely anything, is grist to the mill of the Clinton-haters and the Reno-haters. Yesterday they all piled in, led by Senator Bob Smith of New Hampshire, a man who is so rightwing and so conservative that he couldn't raise even 1% support from his own party in his abortive Republican presidential bid last year.   There is a case to be made that the administration waited too long, was too conciliatory, too cowardly, and that it allowed the Elian issue to balloon out of proportion. But it's a case that should be made with care. There were, and are, court proceedings to take heed of. And as long as Elian's father, Juan Miguel Gonzalez, remained in Cuba, the decision to return the boy was much more complex, and politically charged than it became once Juan Miguel arrived in the US on April 6. If Janet Reno delayed too long, the delay was a matter of days rather than weeks.  To describe the Elian case as anybody's triumph would be wrong. Too many of the principals in the saga have been too badly damaged to say that - and it is not over yet. Yet there is no getting away from the fact that Saturday was, at one level, Janet   Reno's revenge upon the many critics who have mocked and insulted her for eight years, and especially since the catastrophic end of the Waco siege in April 1993.  On Saturday, the St Louis Post-Dispatch published an exclusive story which was inevitably overlooked in the dramas of the day. It reported that a detailed court-ordered re-enactment of the end of the Waco siege had established beyond reasonable doubt that the FBI did not fire shots into the Branch Davidian compound seven years ago - the central charge that the Reno-haters have been making all these years.  One way and another, it would be fair to say that one of the most unjustly maligned politicians in the United States had a good day last Saturday.