Only three more weeks to go and we will have survived the month-long celebration of the life and work of an elderly lady whom we barely know. I am, in my charitable way, prepared to believe that Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, is admirable in every particular - modest, self-effacing, compassionate, frugal - and that her detractors, who claim the opposite, are mean-minded iconoclasts. But I have to admit that a public figure who never gives interviews, appears on television or broadcasts on radio is bound, as far as the general public is concerned, to remain an enigma. Yet this summer we have treated Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon-as-was (to use my native South Yorkshire patois) with something approaching idolatry. She is even to be immortalised in a Ledo Collectible three and half inch model of Bull Nose Morris Van with her portrait on the side (£9.99 plus p &amp; p). The Queen Mother attracts our worship and "lovingly crafted tributes" in small part because of her age. It was Alan Bennett who wrote that, in England, anyone who can still crack open an egg at the age of 80 is automatically sanctified. But her status is the result of longevity combined with what, by rational standards, is not an automatic sign of distinction. We are required to love her because she was once married to the king. That is proof that a hereditary monarchy has no place in a grown-up world.  The absurdity was proved beyond doubt by a television programme which, last week, sought to draw attention to some of the Queen Mother's alleged failings. To redress the balance of a generally critical profile (and, I suspect, to provide a paragraph in the letter which will be drafted as a reply to complaints), viewers were exposed to the opinions of the Reverend Anthony Hall Harrison Harbottle who was described as Chaplain to the Queen Mother. Mr Harbottle spoke on behalf of those who had enjoyed the privilege of seeing his patron at close quarters. They would, he said, all agree that she was a living and literal example of the "beatific vision".   I t was not clear if he meant that the Queen Mother was bathed in God's redeeming light, a view which is no more than sacrilegious, or if he suggested that she radiated it herself, a judgment which is positively blasphemous. We can, however, be certain that he was speaking literally. To avoid any suspicion of metaphor he went on to say that she "already has one foot in Heaven". And Mr Harbottle has no doubt about what will happen when the rest of her passes through the pearly gates. When, he said, "the great call comes as it must come to us all", her spirit will watch over and protect the   royal family that she leaves behind.  Were the reverend to offer such an opinion about the postmortem prospects of any human being who was not a member of the royal family, he would be taken away for rest and recuperation among people who believe themselves to be Napoleon Bonaparte. But talking arrant guff about the Queen Mother is regarded, at least by some of our more popular newspapers, as a sign of grace. There is also a theoretical justification for all the mystical nonsense. The Queen apparently believes that she is the Lord's anointed, chosen by providence to rule over us. It is a strange sort of meritocracy which has such a person as its head of state.  I console myself with the thought that the month of false sentiment which we now endure can only add to the pressure to bring our constitution up to date. The mood is already changing and the monarchists, who once took the divine right for granted, are beginning to defend their indefensible position with arguments which   are as spurious as the institution they admire is anachronistic. A A Gill, in the Sunday Times a couple of weeks ago, warned that a republic might be led by a President Hattersley or a President Tebbit - undoubtedly a terrible prospect but not one which ought to keep us awake at night.  The president this country needs would have no executive authority. The prejudiced and partial decisions about how the nation is run would be taken, as they always have been, by the government in parliament. The head of state would be a jovial person (thus ruling out Tebbit and me) - content to sign bills into law, meet foreign dignitaries at airports and perform various other honorific functions without even the slightest suggestion that the office had anything to do with power.  Ideally, it should be somebody of whom we have never heard. I challenge you to tell me the name of the president of Germany. Perhaps more important, in the summer of 2000, we can be absolutely sure that his mother is not exalted above all others or that when he dies, his widow will be elevated to the status of saint and martyr. Nor will his son automatically succeed him to the presidency. If that seems a reasonable state of affairs, whether you know it or not, you are a republican.