I was brought up to believe that "everything back to normal" was good news - the comforting reassurance that after the night's Blitz, the visit of my aunt or a sudden attack of infant asthma, the world had reverted to its familiar course. But in this, as in so much else, Northern Ireland is different. A statue of a masked gunman masquerading as a memorial has been unveiled in Derry. President Clinton hopes for a Saint Patrick's Day breakthrough. The bodies of young men - brutally murdered in reprisal for some unspecified crime - are left to rot. The secretary of state, battling to keep hopes of permanent peace alive, is accused of prejudice by politicians who want him to be biased in their favour. Rocket-launchers are found near to the married quarters of the British troops who guarantee the peace.  While politicians discuss the destruction of long-held arms and ammunition, new weapons are imported into the province. Everything is back to normal. Optimists insist that "the law-abiding majority want peace". The majority has rarely been so silent. Is Reverend Ian Paisley deluged with messages warning him that unless he assists in the creation of a power-sharing government he will be defeated at the next election? Do members of the Orange Lodge stop David Trimble in the street and tell him that compromise is common sense? Are Sinn Fein supporters demanding that Gerry Adams forgets about the Dublin General Post Office in 1916 and starts to think of Ulster schoolchildren now?  The most charitable answer is that the voices of sanity are drowned by nonsense about "no surrender" and "Ireland unfree will never be at peace". Instinct and logic both make me a republican. I want to see a united Ireland. That aspiration would be brought significantly closer to realisation by full implementation of the Good Friday agreement. Much as I deplore their attitudes, I understand why intransigent unionists want to postpone the inevitable unification of their divided nation.  But why does Sinn Fein jeopardise the greening of Northern Ireland? The only plausible explanation is that their judgment has been warped by history. That does not excuse denunciations of Peter Mandelson for his decision to suspend the Northern Ireland parliament and executive. They must know that the alternative to temporary limbo was permanent extinction. Once David Trimble had resigned and walked out, it would have been impossible for him to walk back in again. For once, it is hard not to sympathise with unionist impatience.  Progress to lasting peace has been waylaid by   republican hubris - the refusal to destroy arms which they say will never be used. The IRA's determination to protect every Armalite rifle and preserve every ounce of Semtex is so indefensible that Mr Adams was forced to defend the decision with arguments which even he (not the most sensitive of men) must have found embarrassing. An undefeated army, he said, has never surrendered its arms. I have no idea whether or not Mr Adams is a reliable military historian. But I know that when he spoke of the IRA in that vainglorious language, he sounded like a schoolboy playing soldiers in the park. I have always thought of him as both cynical and sinister. But never, before his theatrical excuse for what is inexcusable, have I thought of him as silly. Only in the world turned upside down are the lives of innocent men and women - not to mention the peace and prosperity of a whole province - put at risk by palpable silliness.  One explanation of Mr Adams's conduct is the suggestion, put to me in Belfast   10 years ago, that he is no longer a free agent. I met him shortly after he had acted as pallbearer at an IRA funeral - paying homage to a man who had killed himself, as well as two little boys, in a bomb attack on a shop which had been wrongly identified as Orange paramilitary headquarters. When I asked Mr Adams how he justified treating such a man as a hero, he was too angry to reply.  But the bodyguard, who escorted me from the derelict factory in which we met, told me to remember Michael Collins - murdered in 1922 because ultra-republicans thought him insufficiently extreme. That comparison may go some way towards diagnosing the cause of Mr Adams's conduct. But it does nothing to increase confidence in Northern Ireland's suitability for civilised self government.  No doubt Peter Mandelson and the prime minister will go on trying to secure a lasting peace. And so they should. Win or lose, their continued efforts are much to their credit. But the rest of us will remain bewildered about why so many people should so regularly choose to turn their backs on peace and progress and conclude that "back to normal" in Northern Ireland means a return to murder and mayhem.