No doubt you were gratified to see the weekend photographs which, according to the captions, confirmed that the Earl and Countess of Wessex were enjoying their honeymoon. Anxieties about how Prince Edward was spending his time were allayed by the news that his new wife, a golf enthusiast, was teaching him how to putt on the lawn of one of the several castles where they have passed the time since their wedding. Before I speculate on why newspaper editors - normally hard-headed men and women - believe their readers to be interested in the daily lives of these undistinguished persons, I ought to admit my brief (but revealing) relationship with the Queen's third son.  A couple of years ago, the prince wrote to me with the proposition that I should take part in a television programme he was making. The subject was the monarchy. I was to argue the case for a republic. Enthusiastic as I am to propagate that rational cause, I nevertheless asked the question which professional journalists (and, for that matter, professional plumbers) ask when offered casual employment. How much? An executive with the prince's company made me a unique offer. No money would change hands, but in recompense for my services I would be invited for lunch with the prince himself.  The memory of the offer still infuriates me - not because of the vulgarity of the proposition or the impropriety of the royal family exploiting its status, but because of what it reveals about my lack of mental agility.  I should have responded with a letter explaining that payments in kind are being regarded as income, so it was my duty to disclose the lunch in my tax statement. In consequence, I needed to know how much the lunch would be worth. Assuming that we would meet in a restaurant, would the price (as signified by the bill) be the same as the value? Or might my accountant advise that the inland revenue would add a surcharge to represent the bonus of eating in such exalted company?  I did not appear in the programme. But, having come so close to a moment of greatness, the name of my potential royal patron should have been engraved on my mind if not my heart. Unfortunately, a couple of weeks ago on Any Questions, I spoke of Prince Michael's impending marriage. The response to my idiocy was a depressing commentary on Britain at the turn of the millennium. Nobody accused me of being a dunderhead, justified though the allegation would have been. Some correspondents abused me for attempting to ridicule the royal family. Others congratulated me for the same reason. The assumption was that I had made a deliberate mistake. Nobody, republican or monarchist, could believe that the name and title of a royal prince could have escaped my mind.  That, I suppose, answers the question with which this column began. Uniquely in the developed world, Britain is obsessed by its royal family. So this strange young man becomes a celebrity, not because of what he has achieved but because of who his mother is. On the Any Questions programme during which I made an idiot of myself, immensely sensible participants were piously absurd about his nuptials. Should his bride, the questioner asked, promise to obey? Instead of responding "Who cares?", they all said that it was a private matter to be decided by the couple. The private matter was being televised.  Viewing figures were so low that, had the marriage been a pilot broadcast to test the appeal of a possible series, the whole enterprise would have been abandoned within hours of the happy couple leaving Saint George's chapel. But the growing disenchantment with the monarchy is not reflected in our newspapers. The royal family provides pretty pictures and sentimental stories. So Happy. So In Love. The headlines seemed to forget that such emotions are common among wedding couples. The feelings become special because they run through the blood royal.  It is not a conspiracy which protects the royal family. For, tragically, the obeisances are instinctive rather than calculated. But no grown-up nation could possibly regard the Earl and Countess of Wessex as persons of the slightest consequence. Until they are relegated to the status of the other ex-royals who appeared on their wedding photographs, we remain a retarded nation.