You may have noticed that last week Edward Windsor announced his intention to marry Sophie Rhys-Jones. The bride is a public relations consultant. Her groom's status and standing are slightly more difficult to describe. If his grandmother falls off her horse, his eldest brother skies into a tree, his two nephews absail on a frayed rope down the wall of a disused reservoir and his older brother crashes the desk which he flies at the Ministry of Defence, he may become king. 
To describe that prospect as mercifully remote is not to denigrate Edward Windsor's regal potential. God save the Queen, we all loyally cry. Even those of us who fear that our prayers are not always answered have little doubt that providence will not allow the whole royal family to be 
massacred simultaneously. So Prince Edward (for it is he) is a person of absolutely no constitutional significance. A question therefore arises. Why all the fuss? 
The fuss to which I refer is the prominence given to his proposed marriage by newspapers, radio and television. These days, the editors of even serious newspapers feel a strange desire to print photographs of personable women on their front pages - whether it is Paymaster General Dawn Primarolo or prospective Princess Sophie. But the real impetus behind the headlines was the Prince - the word rather than the man. It is assumed that anything connected, no matter how remotely, with the royal family sells newspapers. Let us pray it is not so. 
On the evening of the announcement - whilst the most powerful man in the world was facing impeachment - the BBC devoted the first 10 minutes of the Six O' Clock News to the happy couple. To spend so much time on a young man who had done so little required the producer to scrape the bottom of the bulletin's barrel. So we heard from the Prince Edward's biographer (not a surefire winner of the Whitbread Prize) and a lady who was described on the caption as "a relationship expert". We were not told how she acquired that distinction or where she plied her trade. Fortunately for the viewers' peace of mind she expressed her certainty that the marriage would be a huge success. 
Later on Newsnight Jeremy Paxman - the conspicuous incredulity, which has become his trademark for once justified - interviewed a man from the Daily Telegraph who said that Americans like the Royal Family because the Queen has "class". If, as I am told, the attribute to which he referred is elegant distinction, it is rarely possessed by those who describe it in that vulgar monosyllable. But that aside, Americans seem enthusiastic for us to have a monarchy, not to have one of their own. They had the chance in 1776 and turned it down. Even if their rejection of George III was understandable, some quick talking is necessary to explain why they refused to replace him with a sovereign of the same name - the founder of the House of Washington. 
If American enthusiasm is the best reason for preserving the monarchy, the House of Windsor is in desperate trouble - or it would be if it were not for the newspapers. Few editors' offices would have been bombarded with complaints if the news of Prince Edward's intentions had been relegated to an obscure inside page. But the nation is constantly told that it is fascinated by the goings on of the Royal Family - and the weak minded, who still believe what they read in the papers, assume that it is true and think that they must share the preoccupation. There is a small minority of idiots who give flowers to the Queen Mother on her birthday and mob Ms Rhys-Jones as she goes into her office. Most people would live perfectly happily if they had never heard of Prince Edward again. 
Yet, on occasions like last Thursday, we exposed ourselves to the world as a nation still fascinated by the frivolous irrelevance of an hereditary monarchy. The Prime Minister talks about modernising the constitution and preparing the economy to live in the new world of the 21st century. Yet we approach the millennium apparently fascinated by a 34-year-old man for no other reason than that he is called Prince. In this particular, the country has actually regressed. A hundred years ago, Britain was far more sceptical than it is today about the virtues of the monarchy.  
If only Queen Victoria had remained in secluded mourning for another year or two, the republican movement would have really caught on and today the head of state would have been an elected president with sons and daughters in whom nobody took the slightest interest. That is the strength of the presidential system by which we should replace the monarchy. Do not be intimidated by silly questions about who the president would be. Can you remember the name of the President of Germany or Mary Robinson's successor in Ireland? In a parliamentary system, nine times out of 10, the president is virtually unknown - folded flat when not in use and inflated for special ceremonial occasions. That is exactly how it would be in a democracy which despises deference and regards the hereditary principle as indefensible.