Tomorrow the Queen will arrive at the House of Commons a little before noon.
She will be wearing full evening dress, complete with tiara, and the Duke of
Edinburgh will be in the uniform of an Admiral of the Fleet. If the Prince
of Wales, (promoted to three-star rank on his 50th birthday) is also there,
he too will be in full regimentals - a very modern major-general, air
marshal, or rear-admiral. 
The Queen, escorted through the Royal Gallery of the House of Lords by men
dressed as playing cards, will be guarded by retired servicemen (dressed
like Tudor flunkies) who spent the previous night searching the Palace of
Westminster for signs of a Popish plot. Her real protection will be
supervised by the Commissioner of Police who, under a spiked helmet, will
ride about Whitehall on a borrowed horse. And we are supposed to believe
that the State Opening of Parliament has been modernised because when the
Queen enters the Lords' Chamber only two of her retainers will walk
backwards instead of the usual four. 
In fact, most of what goes on tomorrow morning illustrates an aspect of the
monarchy about which we hear too little. We are increasingly and rightly
reminded that it is an anachronism which must take most of the blame for
focusing the nation's attention on the glorious past rather than an
uncertain future. 
There is mounting criticism of its visible extravagance and proper
resentment of the way in which its existence encourages both deference and
the strange superstition that some families possess inherent virtues which
they pass on generation to generation. But we rarely hear the most damaging
indictment of all. The institution is inherently silly. And it obliges
everyone it touches to do silly things. If you doubt it, watch television
and see Labour Peers - many of them of remarkable ability and with a genuine
radical disposition - dressed up like the chorus of Iolanthe.
I am reminded of the monarchy's absurdity on those early mornings when I
pass Buckingham Palace and witness a strange ritual which does not appear in
any of the guide books. A police van pulls up outside the gates of Green
Park and four officers take up positions which enable them to stop the
traffic on Constitution Hill, around the Victoria Monument, and along the
Mall into Trafalgar Square. Their colleagues at the Palace Gates - normally
a jovial bunch who provide untiring help to tourists - halt all pedestrian
movement. 
The gates swing open and Prince Andrew is driven off in convoy to his desk
job at the Ministry of Defence, without suffering the humiliation of being
held up by traffic lights or gridlocks. The inconvenience so caused does not
amount to much. And it provides an opportunity for my dog to sit down and
scratch himself but, when you think about it, the whole performance is
absurd. 
Unfortunately, the absurdity is contagious. Six months ago, as part of the
Palace's charm offensive, the Queen visited somewhere in Whitehall after a
brief stop in Westminster, and she walked the 50 yards between the two
engagements!
Royal reporters could contain neither their astonishment nor their delight.
They had seen the Queen walk before but normally only to podium, dais or
saluting base and then only after the cheering crowds had been cleared from
her path. 
By walking like you and I - simply to move her Royal Personage from one
place to another - the Queen was said to have signified her closeness to the
people. It is amazing that the event has not been marked by symbolic
footprints carved into the paving stones.
And it seems that we will never grow up. The Times devotes a more or less
serious editorial to the Prince of Wales's use of the adjective 'bloody'
while, on the same day, the Telegraph profiles the pages who will carry the
Queen's train to the State Opening. Meanwhile the Mirror locks crumpled
horns with Buckingham Palace about its report of Prince Harry's very minor
injury. 
For what it is worth, there can be no doubt that the Mirror was entitled to
publish the story. The Royal Family - since they trade under that name -
have less right to privacy than the rest of us. If Harry is going to be king
one day, his loyal future subjects have a right to know when he is hit on
the head. The real criticism of the Mirror is that they bothered to tell the
story. Who cares? 
The answer to that rhetorical question is 'the thousands of people who have
been persuaded by newspapers that there is something interesting, perhaps
even exciting, about royalty'. Brigitte Bardot, flying over from France to
visit a dog on remand, attracts the same sort of press attention. 
The sort of interest which the press stimulates - part prurient and part
obsequious - would not end if the monarchy were merely modernised. There
would be endless pictures of Princess Margaret on her bicycle and the Queen
Mother queuing at the Sainsbury check-out. The only solution is abolition
and replacement by a powerless president. It is hard to be silly about a
faceless figurehead whose name you cannot even remember.