It is an earlier weekend which I remember best - not the Saturday on which Tony Crosland died, but the Sunday which we spent together at Dorneywood. He had been foreign secretary for six months, yet it was his first visit to his official country residence. I was there to confirm his view that the trappings of office were absurd as well as offensive and to share his amused amazement every time that the resident butler rushed forward to prevent one of us from pouring his own drink. In her admirable biography of her husband, Susan Crosland confessed that she spent much of the evening convincing the Dorneywood staff that they would not be made redundant. No doubt Tony would have saved them as he saved, when he was secretary of state for the environment, other ancient monuments to England's past glories. He would not, however, have found it necessary to make regular visits to that site of particular historical interest. In those days, iconoclasts walked the land.  Tomorrow is the 25th anniversary of Tony Crosland's death and I have lost count of the number of times, during the last quarter of a century, that I have recalled and relived that last Sunday - the frayed but fashionable overcoat which somehow he had acquired from his brother-in-law, the film on television which starred "an old girl-friend" who played such a bit part that she was never identified and the continuation of the never-ending discussion about the way in which the Labour party might simultaneously win elections and remain true to its beliefs.  That afternoon our progress along that well-trodden path was interrupted by an uncharacteristic diversion. A journalist - I cannot recall the name - had again described Crosland as "being on the right of the Labour party". It was an allegation to which he had grown accustomed and about which he rarely complained. But on that Sunday he condescended to express his astonishment that anyone could be such a "bloody fool" as to believe that the nuclear deterrent (which he strongly supported) and what was then called the Common Market (about which he was lukewarm) were the defining issues of political belief. The test was equality.  In the 25 years which have followed I have made a scrupulous point of not using Tony Crosland's life and work as sticks with which to beat New Labour. Dead heroes are entitled not to have their views reinterpreted with invented messages from the grave. So I have never pretended that I know what Tony would do and believe were he alive today. I can only say that what he believed then - on that sunny day at Dorneywood - still seems not only right but incontrovertible.   Those beliefs were set out in The Future of Socialism. "In Britain, equality of opportunity and social mobility... are not enough. They need to be combined with measures... to equalise the distribution of rewards and privileges so as to diminish the degree of class stratification, the injustices of large inequalities and the collective discontents" which they cause. I speak again for myself when I say that I have yet to hear a convincing argument against that definition of the good society.  Six months before the 1997 general election, I was one of the superannuated politicians who spoke to prospective ministers about how government works. Geoffrey Hoon asked me - with undisguised incredulity - if, back in the 70s, the Croslandites in the government had attempted to implement the philosophy in which we believed. The answer I gave - with a couple of substantiating examples - was that we tried. Sometimes we failed. At least we had a guiding light with which to illuminate our failures.  The supreme strength of Tony Crosland's political life was the result of a confidence which came from conviction. His critics accused him of academic arrogance - a reputation which he enhanced with the unacademic habit of intentionally offending people he found "trivial" or "frivolous". Certainty is a major virtue in politicians. Crosland wanted to win elections but he had no doubt that victory must have a purpose. Power for power's sake was not enough.  Despite the determination not to speculate about how his ideas might have changed with the years, the temptation to guess what would have happened had he lived through the 70s is irresistible. He would never have become leader of the Labour party - though he would certainly have stood for election in 1980. I did not vote for him in 1976 and I would not have voted for him four years later. Nineteen seventy six was Callaghan's year and 1980 should have belonged to Healey. Political elections are as much about stopping the wrong candidate as choosing the right one. But Tony Crosland would have remained an inspiration to people who followed the politics of belief. It was good to be in government at a time when a consistent and comprehensive idea was not regarded as just another electoral liability.