For a chief whip, ridicule is far more damaging than hatred or contempt. So, Hilary Armstrong must bitterly regret that she told Paul Marsden that war is not an issue about which he is entitled to exercise his highly conspicuous conscience. The curse of old Labour has struck down another convert to Blairism. For Ms Armstrong was repeating the shibboleths of half a century ago. The party which Harold Wilson rightly claimed owed more to Methodism than to Marx, stipulated in its parliamentary standing orders that alcohol and religion were the only two subjects on which MPs might break rank with their colleagues and escape punishment. The standing order was, of course, absurd. Once some subjects are defined as suitable for conscientious abstention, there is a clear implication that the rest are not. Yet conscience is wherever we find it. The immigration regulations, pensioner poverty and the availability of renal dialysis are, or should be, conscientious issues. I am no more entitled to tell a Hindu that his conscience does not apply to the protection of cows than Ms Armstrong is justified in telling Mr Marsden that conscience should not determine his attitude towards the war in Afghanistan.  That is not to say that I have the slightest sympathy for Mr Marsden's behaviour. No sooner had he climbed from his moral high horse than he went running to the newspapers with an account of what should have been a private conversation - not an ideal way for a man of principle to behave. But perfidy is only one of the complaints he has to answer. When MPs cry "conscience" they are demanding the right to rebel without being punished for their rebellion. Mr Marsden's view on the war is not mine. But he should have expressed it in whatever way was available to him without whining about being bullied.  I claim no moral superiority in these matters. This week I celebrate the 30th anniversary of the only serious parliamentary revolt in which I ever took part. When 69 Labour MPs marched into Ted Heath's lobby, in support of Britain joining the common market, we were not as heroic as we pretended. The size of the rebellion made retribution unlikely. I hated being a rebel and slunk off after the vote, instead of going to the Europhile parties. But it was easier to do what was right and win the approval of my friends than do what was wrong and only be congratulated by my enemies. Conscience takes most courage when it tells you to stand alone against people you admire.  By the time of the common market vote, I had already failed to pass that test. Instead of resigning from the government and voting against the 1968 Immigration Act, I convinced myself that it was my conscientious duty not to do anything which might prejudice Labour's chance of being re-elected the following year. The Tories won anyway. Trumpeting about where conscience leads, instead of quietly following it, has a great deal to do with conceit. Clem Attlee knew what he was talking about when he said that it should be a still small voice, not a loudspeaker.  This government - which has broken so much new moral ground - has produced interesting variations on both definitions. Clare Short does not so much wear her conscience on her sleeve as on the end of a piece of elastic. By manipulating it like a yo-yo, she is able sometimes to be the personification of collective responsibility, sometimes the beating heart of socialism and sometimes both things at once. She ought to hold day-release classes to teach innocents like Paul Marsden how to render unto both God and Caesar simultaneously.  I have no more objection to Clare Short supporting government policy than I have to Paul Marsden criticising it - though I regard her assurance that only a few cluster bombs have been dropped on Afghanistan as the modern version of the Victorian Punch cartoon in which a pregnant housemaid promised her employer that the baby would only be a little one. My complaint against both of them is that they parade their virtue as if they have more of it than anyone else. Their conduct tempts cynics to suspect that if they were confident about their conscience, they would not feel the need to expose it so gratuitously.  Once politicians set the boundary lines of moral tolerance, questions arise about the uncharted territory on which their consciences do not safely graze. How many cluster bombs have to dropped on Afghanistan before Ms Short objects? Which of the issues to be faced in this parliament - health service privatisation, the extension of secondary school selection, continued tolerance of fox hunting - does Mr Marsden believe need not trouble his conscience? Protesting too much obviously does nothing for the protesters' reputation. Unfortunately, it gets all politics a bad name as well.