The reassessments were predictable. Speeches that receive extravagant praise on the day after they are made are always judged during the following week to have been overrated by the early commentators. But I still believe that Tony Blair's mixture of unyielding aggression towards terrorism and unqualified compassion for the starving multitudes who need the prosperous west to broker agreements for peace and provide the troops to police them rates with the bravest and best that the Labour party conference has ever heard - Hugh Gaitskell's "Fight and fight again" and Neil Kinnock's denunciation of the Militant tendency. The aspiration was, of course, utopian. "If Rwanda happened again today", it would still be logistically impossible to "save the million people who were slaughtered in cold blood". But it was about time that the country was invited to lift its eyes to the hills that lie beyond the promise of no increase in income tax. What little chance there is of establishing a new world order depends on somebody having the courage to start arguing for it now. As Robert Browning almost said, a prime minister's reach should exceed his grasp, or what's a second term for? Knowing that he welcomes associations with Winston Churchill, I am happy to describe last Tuesday as Tony Blair's finest hour.  To be precise, it was his finest 30 minutes. The first half hour of the speech was magnificent, but then he moved on to all the worst elements of New Labour policy-making. Most disreputable among them is the habit of speaking in vacuous generalities with which no reasonable person could disagree, and then using the resultant unanimity as evidence of support for specific proposals that have never been discussed. "If schools want to develop a speciality - let them." And so say all of us. If the prime minister had said, "Let us create a secondary hierarchy in which some schools are given extra funds and allowed to select a proportion of their intake," even this year's sanitised conference would have rejected the suggestion out of hand.   This should have been the year when the conference at least asserted its right to express rank-and-file dissatisfaction with New Labour policy and the way in which it is made. Its powers have been emasculated but its voice has not been stilled. Yet nobody complained even when the prime minister promised "an alternative provider" offering "a choice for the user of public services" - nor did anyone ask him to explain what that means in practice. This year there was no Labour party conference, just the annual rally of a supporters' club.   The atmosphere, carefully cultivated by the cabinet, made the expression of dissent virtually impossible.  The mood was typified by the discussion of food vouchers for asylum seekers - an indignity against which Bill Morris has argued all year. The long-awaited report, which optimists hoped would herald a more generous-spirited era, was not available. All that David Blunkett, the home secretary, had to say was: "Trust me." Because of the irrational belief that September 11 required the suspension of political discussion, he was saved from the humiliation of being reminded that the last time he asked the party to rely on his honourable intentions he had promised "no selection by examination or interview". Less than 12 hours after he implied that vouchers would be scrapped, he was on Newsnight warning that the government must be careful not to change policy in a way that suggested that it was becoming more sympathetic to refugees.  So the "conference" came and went without the explosion of dissent that, in normal circumstances, would have been its defining characteristic. And - as the government realised when it planned the somnolent four days - by the time the party reassembles next autumn, many of the policies with which party members passionately disagree will have passed through the Commons and be on the point of implementation. More private companies will have been offered the chance to take over schools and run them without the inconvenience of governors nominated by local authorities or parents, the normal terms and conditions of service for teachers or adherence to the national curriculum.  But although the argument will be difficult to continue, continued it will certainly be. The feeling against the replacement of equality with meritocracy is too great and too strong to be extinguished. Disagreement has been stifled not extinguished. And the prime minister, of all people, must realise that the resentment will not disappear. At the end of his speech he said that he will persist with the New Labour project because he believes in it. I have never doubted his sincerity. The rest of us hold our beliefs equally strongly. Like him, we cannot pretend otherwise.