Halfway through August 1940 - the month in which the Battle of Britain was fought in the sky over south-east England - JB Priestly addressed his radio postscript to the people who believed that discussion about "winning the peace" was a dangerous distraction from the primary task of defeating the barbarian at the gate. At the moment, he said, "you may not be interested in politics. But you can be sure that politics is interested in you". He was reminding the men and women who endured the rationing and survived the blitz that, after the war had ended, their lives would be crucially influenced by the result of the arguments that many of them dismissed as inappropriate to the times.  Despite the unhealthy war fever that has been encouraged by the worst newspapers, we are living through no more than a tiny replica of those desperate days. September 11 was an unimaginable catastrophe for the families of America's 7,000 dead and for the Afghans - perhaps tens of thousands in number - who will die of disease, starvation and bombardment before Operation Enduring Freedom is completed. But Britain is not under siege. Tony Blair is right to tell the nation to get on with its normal daily life.  The Labour party, however, is not getting on with its normal annual conference. The recall of parliament - scheduled for next Thursday for reasons that have not been revealed to us - made it impossible for the delegates to stay in Brighton all week. But there will still be six sessions - the minimum necessary for the party to claim the sponsorship income from McDonald's and the rest - to fill.  We already know what the main debates will cover: public services, the fight against terrorism and (to prove that Gordon Brown's windfall tax did not make Labour the enemy of pension funds) the crisis at Equitable Life. But we cannot be absolutely sure what the tone of the conference will be. The prime minister ought to rejoice that the mood is still undecided.  On September 10, acrimonious debate and the defeat of the leadership's policy on asylum seekers and public services was a certainty. But now the trade union leadership and the constituency rank and file are both profoundly reluctant to give the prime minister a hard time.  Views on food vouchers for refugees, the privatisation of public services and creeping selection in secondary schools have not changed. And, if the subjects are handled in a way that suggests an attempt to exploit the desire for unity, there could still be a bloodletting. But general, and wholly justified, admiration for the prime minister's statesmanship during the past three weeks has made all Brighton disinclined to remind him of dissatisfaction on the home front.  When Afghanistan is once again a distant country about which most people know little and care less, passions will rise again. Now nobody wants to behave like Frankie Howerd's railway guard who approached the bruised and battered passenger and told him, "By crawling along the roof of the carriages you managed to climb down into the cab and stop the runaway train. You deserve a medal." And then added, "You haven't got a ticket. So get off." The parallel is remarkably apposite. The legitimate hero must not hope for a free ride.  Confrontation (as distinct from disagreement) will almost certainly be avoided even in the debate about support for America's war aims. And if the leadership openly accepts that deeply held differences on domestic policy have to be accommodated on some future occasion, the other rows can be avoided as well. But the party needs a sign. It is 30 years since the rank and file were as disen chanted with party policy as they are today and more than half a century since a putative rebellion was led by men and women from the moderate tendency. It is because they are moderate that they will do their best to keep the truncated conference calm. The prime minister would make a grievous mistake if he confused emollience in the face of the enemy with lack of conviction.  The party management have a duty to consider their relationship with the rank and file when the emotions of the moment have passed. It is only common sense for them to promise that after Brighton there will be genuine consultation. If, on the other hand, they attempt to argue that the dissenters have had their day by the sea and the questions are now all decided, it will be the New Labour establishment which has failed to rise to the spirit of the occasion.  Assuming that all the contentious questions remain open until and after the policy forum in November, on Wednesday we will all be able to sing Auld Lang Syne with absolute conviction. It is a real test for Tony Blair, who does not enjoy holding hands with his detractors. We shall see if he can be the statesman at home that he has become abroad.