According to the gossip in and about Westminster, the increasing bitterness which characterises the final stages of the Conservative leadership election is the result, at least in part, of Kenneth Clarke's discovery that he is Iain Duncan Smith's patsy. During the Tory MPs ballot, which chose two candidates for submission to party members, half a dozen backbench storm troopers, the story goes, were ordered to vote for Clarke. Duncan Smith was sure that he could beat the cigarette salesman. But he feared defeat by Michael Portillo and therefore plotted to keep him off the shortlist.  Perhaps. But there is another explanation why Mr Portillo, once the clear front-runner, lost a place in the final showdown by one vote. Did he vote for Kenneth Clarke with the calculated intention of avoiding the farce which is tearing the Tory party to pieces? He is certainly clever enough to have anticipated that the election would become a civil war and therefore to realise that sitting out the fratricide would be to his personal advantage.  And the speed of his transformation from rock of the right wing to marshmallow of the middle ground proves that he has the ideological agility to reposition himself as self-interest demands. If he had no part in his own elimination, he has been the beneficiary of three pieces of extraordinary luck. I am reluctant to believe that fate was on his side.  The 1997 defeat at Enfield was initially regarded as an almost fatal blow to his undisguised hopes of greatness. It saved him from the humiliation which William Hague suffered. If Portillo had been re-elected to parliament four years ago, he would have certainly succeeded John Major, and last June he would have had the job of making a gracious speech which conceded that the time had come for Conservatives to choose a new leader.  However, had he remained outside the Commons for a full parliament, his prospects would certainly have been prejudiced. Alan Clark's sudden death, and the consequent byelection in true-blue Kensington and Chelsea, came at exactly the right time. Not only did it propel him back into frontline politics. It gave him the chance to announce that during his wilderness years - pretending to be a hospital porter in order to appear in a television documentary - he was born again.  Then he announced - prematurely some commentators thought - that he was a candidate for the Conservative leadership. Not to have done so would have been to proclaim that he knew his party would lose in 2006 and he was not prepared to go down with the sinking ship. He must have guessed that the next defeat would be as comprehensive as the last.  If Clarke wins, the anti-Europeans will betray him as they betrayed John Major. Duncan Smith could bring the party to its senses by saying, "I too was an extremist. Let us give up extremism together." Although he briefly poses as a clause 28 progressive, no one really believes that his views on homosexuality or, for that matter, on race and immigration have really changed.  With Iain Duncan Smith as leader, the Tory party is worse than doomed. It is flirting with extinction. Clarke seems willing to contribute to that process. Each day he increases the prospects of oblivion with his constant stream of quotable comments about Iain Duncan Smith's association with the disreputable right - all of which are certainly being stored in Millbank for use before polling day. Nobody involved in the leadership fiasco and the resulting election debacle is going to last long after Labour is back in Downing Street. Enter Michael Portillo.   What is then left of the Conservative party will be waiting for his healing touch. All he has to do is act loyal for four years. He must attend the House of Commons with a consistent regularity, encourage young backbenchers to believe that all is not lost and make speeches - in parliament and the country - defending his leader from the calumnies of a prejudiced press. To make the defence effective he may have to give examples of the libels he so resents. But that will not be held against him. The Conservatives are still the stupid party.  The one temptation which he must avoid is saying "I told you so". There will be plenty of Conservatives - angry that they are denied their destiny to rule - who will do that on his behalf. They will make him the favourite to become the Tory leader in four or five years time. Then, at the age of 53, he might even have a chance of becoming the first Conservative prime minister to be elected in 20 years.  The odds may be heavily against. Labour may last for ever. But I suspect that Michael Portillo is still desperate to climb the greasy pole. All hope would have been extinguished last month if he had received more votes than Kenneth Clarke.