To paraphrase Harold Macmillan, these days I am not much in the company of hairdressers. To be honest, I never was. But, 50 years ago, the estrangement did not result from any lack of enthusiasm. In those days, I regarded hairdressers (of the female variety) as creatures of desire second only in attraction to the lady assistants in the Boots cosmetics department. My motives in attempting to arrange a rendezvous have changed, but if there are a couple of crimpers (of either sex) who would like a free acclimatisation tour of the House of Lords, I would be happy to make the arrangement. It might even be possible for them to meet Lord Stevenson of Coddenham, the chairman of the appointment committee who judged that they would not be "comfortable" in such noble company and elevated surroundings.  No doubt, if such a meeting were arranged, the visiting hairdressers would be too polite to offer Lord Stevenson their opinion of his judgment that their whole profession does not include one suitable candidate for elevation to the House of Lords. So here is mine. Lord Stevenson is an ass. No doubt, whatever he does for a living, he does very well. But his television appearances during the day on which the new peers' names were announced exuded all the silliness that comes from a misplaced sense of superiority.  Defending his choice, he told the world that he had ruled out potential peers with "less obvious highfalutin" achievement. What sort of a man is it who equates highfalutin with merit? Perhaps the answer is the sort of man who is so insensitive that he derides hairdressers without (on a charitable interpretation) remembering that the deputy prime minister is married to one. Lord Stevenson would be well advised to keep away from Kingston upon Hull.  However, he comes only second in the competition for prize chump of the Lords appointments commission. The first prize goes to whichever member of the Downing Street press office had the idea of telling the press that the prime minister was to create "people's peers".  Once again, the desire to manipulate the news has turned what might have been a minor success into a major fiasco. For, within the absurd context of an unelected upper house, the independent appointment of distinguished cross-benchers is not a bad idea. It has been made to look ridiculous by a single soundbite that - whatever its attraction to the media - had nothing to do with the policy.  Apologists for a House of Lords that is untainted with democracy always argue that appointments (in one form or another) are the only way to recruit men and women of distinction but no firm politi cal allegiance. Until now, such persons have been the beneficiaries of the prime ministers' patronage. Creating a commission to free the new nobility from the taint of cronyism was a tiny step towards more transparent government. But it had nothing to do with people's peers.  If we are to have an unelected House of Lords, Herman Ouseley, Claus Moser, Susan Greenfield and David Hannay are the sort of people who should be sitting on the red leather. On their arrival they will immensely improve the quality of the place. But this morning, they must be seething with irritation at the farce that has been made of their appointment. They are condemned forever to be names on the "Hairdressers List". The controversy surrounding their elevation will be a feature of their obituaries.  It could have been all so different. If the soundbite had reflected the policy, some genuine people's peers could have been appointed. Long ago, during a television interview after I had announced the creation of a prices watchdog I was asked if it would include an "ordinary housewife", the only possible answer was "yes". So we had to find one. Thousands of hopefuls applied, the civil service cursed and I interviewed a shortlist of three. The successful candidate - after recovering from the shock of discovering that her daily allowance was more than she received for a month of part-time work - was a triumph.  The importance of our "ordinary housewife" was that she was different from the merchant banker and company chairman who sat round the same table. A dozen people's peers with similar qualities could set the House of Lords alight. And they could be found. Last week alone I met a Kent comprehensive headmaster, a hospital registrar, a vicar, a publican and a barber who, given the chance, would do the job admirably. The barber - who would be reluctant to call himself a hairdresser - wondered why the distinguished dozen were so anxious to wear ermine. Unable to provide a convincing answer, I told him to change the subject. So he explained to me why a Keynsian chancellor would exploit a possible economic showdown to increase public expenditure without risking higher inflation.  Roy Hattersley is a member of the House of Lords