A new volume in the Whitehall Histories series has just been published. It is entitled Detente in Europe and it consists of selected "documents of British policy overseas for the period 1972-1976". I mean no offence to the contributors when I say that if their collected works were made into a Broadway musical, it is unlikely that a rave review of the first night would predict that it would run and run. Indeed many of the documents justify the foreboding provoked by the subtitle "volume III, series III". But it is well worth a couple of hours' examination. For it includes pages that reveal the working of the Foreign Office mind. Read them and you will forgive Robin Cook everything. I confess that as soon as I tore my complimentary copy from its wrapping paper, I turned to the index of Detente in Europe to see if it included anything written by me. For most of the period under review I was minister of state at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and I vaguely remember what MBFR stood for. I recall more vividly losing my mutual and balanced force reduction briefing notes before discussions in Washington with Henry Kissinger.  Whatever they may pretend, ministers of state have little independent authority. So, not surprisingly, ENS 2/20, FCO 30.7.74 began with the announcement that I was acting under instructions from the foreign secretary himself. My task was to recommend how he could build on his promise to the House of Commons "to look for opportunities to build a safer and more productive relationship with eastern Europe".  The paper concluded that British self-interest was "often best served by activity and a willingness to initiate movement rather than respond to the proposals and policies of others". For all I now know, my proposals were misconceived and inadequately supported by detailed evidence. Though I was relieved to discover when I had waded through my suggestions for reinvigorating the Conference on Security and Co-operation that the foreign secretary appended a note saying that he approved my general approach. The importance of the document - and diplomatic reaction to it - was not that Roy Hattersley and Jim Callaghan might have been right but that the Foreign Office refused to consider the possibility that it might have been wrong.  The officials' position was set out in a minute to my private secretary, dated June 4 1975 . It was written by Mr Julian Bullard, a considerable scholar as well as a distinguished diplomat and a man whose company I much enjoyed. He sought to squash me with a delicacy that did him credit. Officials, he said, "might have to consider how best to convey the point that there had been a certain continuity in British policy towards the east which transcended change of government in London. To work for new attitudes and initiatives may be an understandable emotion but it confuses the issue by asking officials to search their cupboards and minds for types of action which have never previously been thought to be in the British interest... Naturally these do not exist."  A further note adds that the criticism of the ministerial approach was made "openly" in a meeting. I remember the occasion well. It was one of the long, but for me rewarding, discussions that I hoped would end in acceptance of, if not agreement with, the ministerial wish to encourage detente. One document records that I had agreed to "drop from [the] paper three points which officials had previously contested". If my intention was to mollify the outraged diplomats, I failed. For long after Jim Callaghan had "accepted the line of approach" they still fought a rearguard action.  Their attitude is revealed in Julian Bullard's letter to Sir Thomas Garvey, the British ambassador to Moscow, who complained (with some justification) that ministers were examining a new approach to detente and he was not being told about it. Bullard reassured him. The status of the paper (the foreign secretary's endorsement notwithstanding) was still "ambiguous". It contained "quite a lot with which officials disagreed". Mr Callaghan had "never heard the counter-arguments". So Bullard was "not particularly anxious to give the paper the status of official policy". And there were Callaghan and I in our posh offices thinking that was a job for ministers. Anyway, "nothing could be done until the domestic situation (an impending general election) had been clarified".  Jim Callaghan became prime minister and I joined the cabinet. Not at all to my surprise, Tony Crosland, the new foreign secretary, pursued the same policy in a slightly less diplomatic way. Detente in Europe's last document sets out (in reported speech) a conversation in his office. "There's a strong anti-detente feeling on the opposition benches in the House," Crosland said. "Was it true that FCO officers do not share the Tories' view?" Nobody gave a straight answer.