As the general election approaches, junior ministers - who at the best of times hover between grandeur and servitude - will be subject to severe and sudden mood swings. Parliamentary secretaries who wake up in hope will go to bed in despair. And ministers of state who believed that they had the full support of Downing Street will conclude, after a brief word exchanged behind the speaker's chair, that they have lost the prime minister's confidence. The neurosis is easily explained. In the week that follows polling day, three or four junior ministers will be promoted to the cabinet. Many more will be sacked. The prime minister has to make space for new talent. So the cull will include junior ministers who have done nothing wrong, but have done nothing spectacularly right. The easy way out for the prime minister is to retire everyone over 60. That solution would be palpably unfair to one of the government's greatest successes. For Michael Meacher has been born again.  If the government was running Britain plc - a state of affairs to which I sometimes think the prime minister aspires - Meacher would be promoted to secretary of state, for the simple reason than that he has performed his middle-ranking job ofenvironment minister with both efficiency and &eacute;lan. But even in the half-world of politics which the prime minister inhabits, some of the old prejudices apply. Past mistakes are not forgotten. And 20 years ago, Michael Meacher was a pain in the neck.  When he was a young back-bencher he specialised in asking complicated statistical questions. No one - including the professional statisticians - could understand them. He became a parliamentary secretary because, in those days, it was thought necessary to accommodate the wet left. I am reminded of his performance whenever my dog whines to be let out into the garden. Meacher was a member of the government but not part of it. Balanced precariously between disloyalty and collective responsibility, metaphorically, at least, he emitted a high-pitched moan.  His attitude - a combination of piety and sabotage - was typified by an incident during the 1970s civil service strike. Ministers had agreed to cross the picket lines but would not "black-leg" by performing the tasks of those who had "withheld their labour". At the time, I was secretary of state for a department which shared premises with two other ministries. It was my turn to take responsibility for the joint services - premises, personnel and the like.  So when John Smith (who headed another of the joint departments) saw Meacher   shake hands with the pickets and then turn away from our building, he insisted that it was my job to preside over the court martial. Smith set out the indictment. Meacher lookedlike a recently ordained curate who had just been told that his vicar was a serial killer. "Were they pickets?" he asked. "I thought they were Save the Children flag sellers. And I went away because I suddenly remembered that I had a meeting in the House of Commons." Unusually, John Smith and I were both lost for words.  Socialists believe in an infinite capacity for human improvement. Looking back, I can identify the moment when the big change began. It was at the meeting of the Labour party national executive which preceded the 1984 annual conference. Tony Benn proposed support for a resolution which endorsed Arthur Scargill's decision to strike without balloting his members. Neil Kinnock urged its rejection. The executive was so evenly divided that, when the last name was called, the vote was tied. The last name was Michael Meacher. After a   long pause, he voted against Scargill's folly. There was an even longer silence before Tony Benn said, very quietly, "Michael, may you be forgiven."  I say the same now, though in a different spirit. Meacher has done his penance. When Labour took office four years ago, Meacher - a longstanding elected member of the shadow cabinet - was not given his own ministry. That was the price he paid for the reputation he had acquired almost 20 years earlier. If he moaned about his fate, he moaned in private. He took on the junior job and performed it with conspicuous success. Even the old faults - the invincible innocence and the flagrant naivety - worked in his favour. Last week, asked on television if the Treasury was being difficult about financing the assault on foot and mouth disease, he replied: "I don't know." His assailants were speechless, again.  The secret of his success has three ingredients. He is very clever, he is obsessed with politics and he believes in the job he is doing. For those reasons he has done great credit to the Labour party and the government. After the election, protecting the environment should become a cabinet job. And it should be done by Michael Meacher.