A couple of weeks ago I was accosted by one of Gordon Brown's most influential friends who told me - more in anger than in sorrow - that he deeply resented my "incredibly harsh" criticisms of government social policy. Before I had time to thank him for what I regarded as a compliment, he refined his complaint to a point where it barely existed - or at least applied only to what he regarded as my less than generous attitude towards the chancellor of the exchequer. Indeed he seemed to share my reservations about the rest of the New Labour leadership.  Gordon Brown, he said, was prevented from taking all sorts of progressive initiatives by "the man next door" whose naturally conservative inclinations were always supported by the "second-rate sycophants" who compose his cabinet. What the chancellor's confidant resented was not my occasional expression of dissent but my failure to explain that, bad as some of the government policies are, the chancellor had done his best to improve them.  My suggestion that the Downing Street neighbours were mutually dependent upon each other was greeted with the bitter qualification that "Number 10 controls the publicity machine". And my conclusion that (since they sink or swim together) Gordon Brown must be able to insist that the prime minister keeps his chosen economic policies afloat, was dismissed with the resentful assertion "the boss is always the boss".   I was just beginning to worry about the tone of the conversations which are held across the Whitehall garden wall when my assailant opened up a second front. Did I not realise how much good Gordon Brown is doing by stealth? Billions of pounds - the actual number increased as the conversation grew more heated - had been redistributed from rich to poor. It was a disgrace that Labour activists did not recognise Gordon Brown as a secret socialist.  The chancellor's champion was an economist. So there was no point in starting a discussion on the joys of paradox. Instead, I simply pointed out that Gordon Brown spends so much time and effort pretending to be the Right Honourable Thomas Gradgrind, that he can hardly complain when people believe him.  The intention to deceive is carefully targeted. But I had doubts about the identity of the people who are expected to be less perceptive than the party rank and file. Clearly "the man next door" is not one of them. When Margaret Thatcher claimed that Nigel Lawson's policy of "shadowing the Deutschmark" was put in place behind her back, nobody believed her. Prime ministers know, or at least are told, what is going on. Surely, I suggested, "international   confidence" - that ethereal advantage in whose name so many crimes are committed - is equally well informed.  My inquiry was answered in a tone of undisguised contempt. The impression of parsimony - prudence, like Nurse Cavell's patriotism, not being enough - had to be created in order to retain the support of the still volatile, but apparently unperceptive, suburbs. The implication was clear. If ever it became public knowledge that Labour still felt sympathy for the poor, the government would be doomed. The panic provoked by the prospect of admitting an inclination to help those who need help most was, in one sense, reassuring. Despite New Labour's infatuation with the middle classes, its opinion of their moral character is far lower than mine. I do not assume that their pursuit of self interest has destroyed every generous impulse.  We argued for half an hour. I gladly conceded that the government has been more egalitarian than it is prepared to admit. And I expressed my pleasure that some of the poor had received surreptitious help. But - for reasons which have nothing to do with honesty or open government - I do not believe the double talk to be sustainable. Good intentions will be eaten away, step by step. Fear of the language will evolve into terror of the idea that the words convey. Then it will seem too dangerous to turn principle into practice.  If you doubt the inevitability of that gloomy process, consider both the prospect of Britain joining the single European currency and the hope of Labour raising sufficient revenue to provide the health service with the investment that it so desperately needs. By fearing to advocate either policy, the government actually makes each idea more unpopular. Silence converts nobody. Radical reforms do not become popular unless they are popularised by the government. Pretending that the government is opposed to a policy is not the way to achieve its general acceptance.  The refusal to admit that the government redistributed wealth at the end of the 20th century will make it far more difficult for Gordon Brown to achieve the necessary shift in wealth and power at the beginning of the 21st. Unless politicians are brave enough to say what they believe, they stop believing in the things they dare not say.