The close connection is obvious and undeniable. Most Labour enthusiasts for what they impertinently call "electoral reform" support the introduction of proportional representation because they know that it would lead - irrevocably and unavoidably - to coalition government. No other outcome is possible. The interesting question is whether the proponents of PR welcome that result or accept it as a regrettable necessity. "Fair votes" - another arrogant attempt to end the argument before it begins - would certainly give the Liberal party a share of power. For Labour it would only mean the loss of what remains of its socialist identity. I cite, in support of my warning, a letter written last week to the Guardian by the admirable Oona King, member of parliament for Bow and Bethnal Green. Electoral reform, she wrote, "will benefit the Labour party... The current system allowed the Conservatives to dominate the 20th century". How does Ms King imagine proportional representation would have broken that stranglehold?  It would not have produced majority Labour governments. Indeed full-blown PR would have left Labour in a minority after both the 1945 and 1997 election landslides. Clement Attlee would have governed courtesy of Archibald Sinclair, Tony Blair by grace of Paddy Ashdown.  We know that the prime minister would welcome a marriage of the two true centrist minds - the patrol leaders of politics united in the same Scout troop. But does Ms King think that Clement Davies, Jo Grimond or Jeremy Thorpe would have promoted progress towards the sort of society she wants to see? My abiding memory of Mr Thorpe - apart from his wit and charm - is a speech in defence of stag hunting.  The one ideological justification for PR is the courage and confidence it might give to a genuinely radical but pathologically timorous Labour leader. If the 1997 parliament had been elected by proportional representation, Tony Blair (the argument runs) would have begun the campaign confident of leading the largest party in the subsequent coalition. In consequence he would not have thought it necessary to leap so far to the right.  Whatever else Tony Blair   may be, timorous he is not. Nor does he lack principle. He leapt to the right because the middle ground of politics is where he wants to be. What is called "fair votes" - the meaningless insistence that democracy requires the House of Commons to be an arithmetical reflection of national voting patterns - would keep Labour in the soggy centre for ever.  That is not what Labour's grassroots want. Nor do they believe that it is the inevitable consequence of New Labour's modernisation.  In the long term, their optimism can still be justified. In the short run, it is important for socialists not to lose their nerve. Ten years ago, Labour opposition to coalition was based on the belief that Liberals would act as a sheet anchor, holding back a genuinely democratic socialist government from the creation of a more equal society. Now (despite Charles Kennedy's disavowal of any ambition to outflank Labour on the left) much of his programme is significantly more radical than the government's alternative. The Liberal's education policy is what Labour policy ought to be. Its proposals for freedom of information are what Labour proposals once were.  Last week on radio, Bill Rodgers, the Liberal Democrat leader in the House of Lords, expressed his general sympathy with the aims of Tony Blair's project, but - to my shame and embarrassment - regretted that under New Labour, the gap between rich and poor was widening. Bill Rodgers remains true to his Labour roots. I doubt if the Liberals of Bath and Newbury - with parliamentary victories to their credit - share his views on the overwhelming need to help the urban poor.  The temporary radicalism of a party which has been elbowed out of the middle ground is certainly no reason for abandoning New Labour - a point I make each week to the dozen or so Labour party members who write to me about their despair and disenchantment.  Because of the real but subdued beliefs of the constituency parties, Labour remains the best chance there is of building a more equal society in Britain. But socialists who still cling to that belief have to fight for its resurrection.  This year we mount no more than a rearguard action. But at least we can - and it seems we will - prevent the institutional change which would extinguish all hope of a democratic socialist government ever being elected.