The day after Tony Blair insisted in a speech at the London School of Economics setting out his core philosophy that a belief in society was one of the hallmarks of the progressive Left, London's teachers took to the streets in a one-day strike that closed some 2,000 schools.   Society was reminding Mr Blair of the truth of his statement and that soft words will soon have to be followed by tough deeds. For what had prompted the near unanimous support for the strike was the growing desperation by London teachers over their living conditions. Teachers under 30 cannot afford to buy a house or flat in many parts of London; teachers under 40 cannot afford to trade up. The supply of social housing is inadequate, with minimal new building; desirable houses in the social housing sector have, in any case, long since been sold off under right-to-buy legislation; rents in the private sector are prohibitively high. While the over-fifties luxuriate in the stunning profits they have made out of Britain's house-price boom, those in the generations below, especially those working in the public sector, are beginning to protest at the consequences for them.  Their options are to live with their parents into their thirties (the average age of the first-time buyer is now 34 compared with 29 three decades ago), delay starting families, crowd into shared flats or spend hours commuting because house prices are so high. Generation X is the slave to the extravagant equity in the baby-boomers' houses.  Not only is this an intergenerational inequity, it is fantastically inequitable within the current generation of first- time buyers. Public-sector workers in Britain cannot support the same high mortgages as their private-sector counterparts, and the children from poorer families are disadvantaged in the race to be the first into the housing market. They have to save for their deposit to buy their first house, while the professional middle classes make sure that their offspring are in the housing market early.  There is even a growing trend for richer parents to buy flats for their children when they are at university, leading to a mini-explosion in flat and house prices in the towns and cities that host Britain's top universities. The idea that housing and house prices are just a London problem is risible; London is just where the trends are most acute.   That is not all. The fastest growing segment of the mortgage market is buy to let, so that the rich are turning themselves into a new rentier class. You use the equity in your first house as collateral to buy a second that you then let; then you do the same again. Moreover, growing numbers of people are refusing to sell their first house when they trade up; rather, they hold on to it, let it and borrow against the equity to buy the next. With house prices rising by 15 per cent a year, this is the avenue to riches beyond the dreams of avarice. The supply of people coming forward to rent is disproportionately from the underpaid public sector. On Thursday in London, they began to protest. The wonder is that it has taken so long.  In the New Labour lexicon, inequality is a banned word. The fashionable cry among New Labour intellectuals is 'never mind the gap'. As long as the incomes of those at the bottom of the ladder are sufficiently high to offer minimally reasonable living standards, they argue, there is no reason to be concerned about the incomes of those at the top - they can go as high as globalisation and winner-take-all effects permit.  What is happening in the housing market is a salutary lesson about the speciousness of the argument. Britain is a small, densely populated island. People are living longer and choosing to live alone, either before marriage or after divorce. The number of households is set to rise by some four million over the next 20 years. The supply of land is finite. Against this background of low supply and rising demand, land and property prices are bound to rise.  But what has given the process a further kick has been the interaction between the extraordinary growth of income inequality and a financial infrastructure dedicated more than any other in the world to the provision of credit against the collateral of property. All this is played out against the background of a prolonged period of cheap money with, as the Rowntree Foundation report on Britain's housing crisis remarks, the lowest level of new house construction since 1924.  The dynamic driver of house-price inflation, however, is income inequality. It is high-income households, either alone or in partnership, which are taking out ever greater mortgages, buying to let. This lies at the heart of the rise in demand. Our financial system aids and abets the process, because these are the borrowers - either alone or jointly - to whom it is happy to lend the larger multiples of income with ever bigger mortgages. The income gap, we are discovering, has profound social consequences.  Assuming that we don't want a dear-money regime, the response must be multi-pronged. Left to itself, the market will not build housing on the scale we now need; the state has to do it. There must be a massive building programme to increase supply which, necessarily, will involve higher density building if we are to make the best use of our scarce land.  The Rowntree Foundation recommends higher density building in our existing suburbs, and it is right. We have to reorganise and regulate the financial system's appetite for lending against property; current conditions have all the character of a potential bubble on a dotcom scale and for prudential reasons alone property lending needs to be reigned back.  We have to tax property more, along with the very high incomes of those who are buying more than one property. And we are going to have pay our public-sector workers more, with better London weighting.  Much of this may seem politically impossible and certainly against the 'never mind the gap' market philosophy of New Labour. But Mr Blair is right. There is such a thing as society.   Looking after its interests, however, requires that the state must do more than urge and 'steer'; it has to do, and it has to limit inequality when it threatens social cohesion. In the housing market, the moment is fast arriving, portending another area where New Labour's five-year honeymoon is about to end.