More lives will have been touched by this man who never held an office of state than by almost all of today's British cabinet. Lord Young of Dartington, who died last week, left a greater legacy of effective institutions over his lifetime than most of those we elected in 1997 seem likely to achieve in theirs. It is hard to think of any longstanding cabinet minister who could begin to match Michael Young's prodigious record. Young left behind him the Open University, the Consumers Association and the School for Social Entrepreneurs (to name but a few) and had a huge hand in shaping the post welfare state. Even Brown and Blair are hard put to rival Young's achievement. Blair might point to the Scottish and Welsh parliaments - stunted institutions both - and Brown to the independent Bank of England, but that was more an adaptation of an existing institution than the creation of a new one. New Labour's record of championing, building and sustaining innovative institutions, given the size of its   parliamentary majority and size of its stated ambition, is paltry.  To build an institution you have to have fire in your belly. Institutions are the way you change a society over time; they are its building blocks. Jacques Delors once famously said that the European Union had to constructed around institutions; they would be alive long after their builders were dead, so cementing the intent to integrate Europe.  The BBC entrenches our belief in public service broadcasting, the Open University our commitment to enfranchising every citizen with the chance of earning a degree. They hold our values in their organisational structure.  New Labour fights shy of institution building - the real evidence of the uncertainty of belief at the party's core. As one deep throat in the Bush administration has said, it is a finesser rather than a fixer and builder. If you are going to build institutions to serve a political, economic or social purpose you have be clear about your intentions; institutions need principles to underpin them. The Government is not clear about its aims. It prefers an eye-catching initiative, a tax credit or the creation of a 'tsar' that can be changed as opinion poll readings change to the painful and laborious position of building an organisation and riding over the vested interests inevitably opposed. Thus it only ventured a new   organisation to run the British rail system - a non-dividend distributing trust - when Railtrack's obvious unsustainability finally turned into collapse; even now its refusal to compensate Railtrack's shareholders means the new organisation is frozen. At bottom New Labour remains a temporiser.  Michael Young was no temporiser, but then he was fired by conviction. If, as one obituary neatly put it, he was 'late Victorian' in his commitment to building institutions dedicated to social improvement, that was because he genuinely believed in the vital right of every citizen of whatever rank to participate fully in society. That was what drove his inspiring lines in Labour's 1945 manifesto: that Labour's ultimate purpose was to set in train a great programme of modernisation to create a 'free, democratic, efficient, public-spirited country with its material resources organised in the service of the British people' - a purpose tempered by practicality and planning from the ground up. As befitted the man who founded the Institute of Community Studies, he swore: 'The Labour Party will put the community first'.  Young in this sense was the living embodiment of the great liberal principles set out by the American political philosopher, John Rawls. The issue is what we consider to constitute the good society. Is human happiness achieved solely by permitting the exercise of individual liberty in an essentially Darwinian struggle to maximise self-interest and profit? Or are we more altruistic beings that seek to express our social instincts in a form of enduring social contract? Rawls set out to prove that if left to ourselves we would form a social contract spontaneously, and went on to suggest that its key principle would be that the poor would only be allowed to have that degree of disadvantage which the rich would accept if they swapped places. He argued that society should establish an infrastructure of justice that would not only guarantee basic material living standards, but all those civic, political and educational rights that would give each member of a society the chance not just to participate but to command self-respect.  Young was living out Rawlsian ideas 25 years before  A Theory Of Justice was published in 1973. He had the capacity to empathise; to put himself in the heads of those worse off than himself, imagine their reaction and then take it upon himself to champion lasting institutions that would make things better. And although his passionate advocacy of comprehensive schools and his accompanying mockery of the idea of an educational meritocracy have been much criticised, I have come to the view he was right.  Put yourself in the heads of   the millions of families who have not the remotest chance of educating their children privately: feel their sense of injustice at the way lifelong advantage can simply be bought. Is this the basis of any kind of just society? Visit a better comprehensive and witness at first hand its sparkling energy and saltiness and, despite everything, its commitment to education. The children have that vital capacity - like Young - to get in each other's minds. Poor comprehensives, overwhelmed by the poverty surrounding them, indifferent leadership and misguided teaching methods, do malfunction. But in consigning the idea to the dustbin we are giving up on a key institution of the just society.  Young's achievement was to translate his altruism into practical ideas that could be embodied in living institutions. He said that he did not have the personality to go into politics but, given his legacy, that is a reproach to our current political culture - and in particular to the politicians of the left. If Young could achieve what he did without ever having his hands directly on state power, what could be achieved by those who do hold office, if they were to share a modicum of his conviction and drive? But first they have to believe in social justice, to empathise with the disadvantaged and want to create institutions that make a difference. New Labour could yet learn a lot from him.