Last week, 900,000 people learned that a lifetime's savings were suddenly worth 16 per cent less than they had every reason to expect. Retirement plans and calculations about paying off the mortgage with the proceeds of an endowment policy were dashed. Equitable Life's savers have, in effect, been swindled as the company, still suffering from massive financial miscalculations made more than a decade ago, struggles to maintain its solvency by reducing payments it had promised. It is a salutary moment. For two decades, politicians of first the Conservative Party and now the Labour Party have been wedded to the notion that the state should largely privatise the responsibility for security in old age. It has been axiomatic that private-sector provision is, a priori, better than public-sector provision; that pounds saved through the National Insurance system could be better spent investing in stock and shares. Only the state, it is said, breaks its promises over pensions which the   private sector always keeps. The only kind of pension provision that the state should provide is a means-tested minimum guaranteed income for the feckless.  Last week's dramatic announcement should disabuse everybody of the entire raft of propositions, sadly embraced with the all the vigour of the convert by New Labour. Yet few Labour politicians or policy advisers, with one or two honourable exceptions, that I have ever asked fully understand the practice of funded pensions and their risks. Nor are they alone; ignorance is pervasive. The British are contributing to a pension system that not one in 10,000 understands.  Small wonder the financial services industry gets away with what is a rip-off. Commissions are still too high; the risks of stock market underperformance and dwindling annuity rates are impossible to guard against. The chance that the particular company through which you save might be another Equitable Life is unavoidable; regulation remains terrified of being overly prescriptive.  In these circumstances, every British citizen should be offered a solid state pension, uplifted annually by the increase in average earnings, as a citizen's basic income in retirement. By asking our people to invest in the stock market to provide for the bulk of their pension is to require them to accept too much risk. Pension funds themselves spread their risks through different forms of investment, and while we should continue to save for retirement through pension funds and insurance companies, we should all be allowed to spread the risk as well, which means that part of every citizen's portfolio of assets is the right to a good state pension. The combination of stakeholder pensions, in which the working class is being invited to buy shares at the end of a 25-year boom, and the minimum retirement income guarantee are simply an inadequate framework for pension provision. There is too much risk and too little reward.  New Labour politicians, however, regard private pensions provided for by individual saving as something of a free lunch. The state need no longer accept the liability to pay Britain's elderly a decent pension; it can pass the buck to insurance companies and if the resulting pensions are dismal, tough luck.  Up until three years ago, investing in shares had produced an average return of 15 per cent in real terms for more than two decades, even though the economy was only growing at some 2 per cent. But more amazingly still, this happened as interest rates were very high as governments pursued a dear money policy to drive inflation down. So pensioners retiring over the last 10 years have done well. They got the benefit of exceptional returns in investment in shares and then, when they used their accumulated investment to buy an annuity that produces their pension, they benefited from exceptionally high annuity rates, linked, as they are, to interest rates.  But this could never last. The returns in share investment are falling to earth, given the dizzy valuations that the stock market now accords British and American companies; it cannot repeat what it has done over the last 25 years. Moreover, low inflation begets low interest rates which in turn means low annuity rates. Equitable Life's problems are rooted in these developments, which it compounded by promising some of its policy holders returns that depended on high interest rates continuing. (I declare an interest - I am one.)  Every other pension fund and insurance company faces the same problem. To achieve the same pensions as the current cohort of new pensioners, people under 50 are going to have save much more than their predecessors, up to 20 per cent of their salary. Moreover, they have to choose the right insurance or investment company to manage their money well, hope they are lucky and then carefully plan their retirement so they can instruct their company to move their savings into less risky investments as they approach retirement so they don't get burned by a sudden fall in the stock market.  Nor can companies afford to guarantee pension benefits any more; if they did so, their annual pension contribution could equal a quarter of their payroll costs and put them out of business. Instead, companies are compelled to put their employees more at risk by offering schemes that offer no guaranteed pension.  The smug satisfaction about Britain having funded pensions and that employers and employees have low levels of contributions to pay for state pensions compared with continental Europe will, I predict, over the next 10 years turn to the same dismay as we have over our rail system. Pensioner poverty will increase and there will be more disasters like Equitable Life. The British will learn what is obvious - you get what you pay for.  But pension funds are also a commission honeypot; the fees are the single most important source of sky-high City salaries. If we need the Government to assure a good universal state pension, we also need City professionals to start taking their responsibilities more seriously. It is crucial that Equitable's accountants and actuaries, and the old board, all suffer crippling damages. The country needs to start reading the small print on its saving policies. A One Nation politician has an open goal. It will be interesting to see if Ken Clarke seizes his opportunity.