It began in the 1970s, but I don't think any of the conservative intellectuals at the forefront of what they then called the counter-revolution ever believed that their success could be so complete. Yet, as Carol Galley, the famous fund manager and playmaker of any number of City deals, announced her retirement last week from a job with an annual income of more than £8 million and having assembled up to £100 million in personal wealth, you have to rub your eyes. Wealth beyond any reasonable person's imagination for quite ordinary jobs is no longer unusual in the upper echelons of society. To enjoy an incredible income is not merely a validation of individual success - it is proof positive that conservative ideas have triumphed.  These incomes are not the returns for entrepreneurialism, especial talent or hard work. Galley, with her colleague, Stephen Zimmerman, who also retired last week with similar wealth, did nothing cleverer than join a City bank after university, keep their noses clean,   display moderate competence and climb the hierarchy. They were beneficiaries of the 25-year boom in share prices and the associated growth in pension funds. The archaic fee structure meant that profits from fund management exploded. In this environment, monkeys could have got wealthy.  They were little more than what the Japanese disparagingly call 'salarymen' - dutiful and slightly unimaginative officers of a private-sector organisation but lucky enough to be in the right place at the right time. But today's salarymen are doing better than ever before. The executives at the top of our large companies enjoy habitual remuneration packages of £1m, but with little relation to competence or performance, as is underlined by the DTI's report into how City institutions - all mega-payers - failed to prevent Robert Maxwell from ripping off his pension funds.  Britain is in the middle of a building boom, but of Palladian country houses; £5m houses are a regular feature of the central London property market. There are waiting-lists for yachts costing tens of millions of pounds. Shops specialising in the sale of ludicrously priced art, porcelain, jewellery and designer clothes proliferate. And whatever is happening here is but a pale shadow of the baroque patterns of income and luxury spending in the United States. Indeed, Britain is only just beginning. The ratio of chief executives' remuneration to average workers' salaries stands at 35 to one in this country, roughly where it was in the US 15 years ago. In the States, it has climbed to 450 to one - and there is nothing to stop the same evolution in Britain.  The last vestiges of Old Labour's post-war settlement, such as that most people if they worked sufficiently hard would be able to buy a decent house in a decent part of town, are being swept away. Soon, only the super-rich will be able to live in central London, for example, another success for New Labour.  The question is whether it matters. For the conservative Right, it is a manifestation of successful capitalism. If you think profit is the sole motivating force, you might complain about the taste of the new super-rich but not that they are rich. There can be no constraint on what they earn. Indeed, the more they make, the more they display the creativity and embrace the modernity that benefits us all. To wish for them to have less is ignoble and jealous.  Herein lies the ultimate confusion. The super-rich aren't any more creative than the rest of us - they just have more money. What is intriguing is not how well they spend it, but how badly. William Randolph Hearst's castle at San Simeon in California is a wonderful expression of fantasy and creativity, but I can't think of another example in the US and not one in the UK. And while the US has a long tradition of its rich entrepreneurs giving their fortunes back to   the community via foundations and trusts, the British rich think only of keeping their money offshore and avoiding obligations to the commonwealth. They are about as creative as sharks, but with plummier accents.  Unless the rich have crazy hobbies, there is no obvious way to spend the cash ladled out to 'incentivise' our second-rate and modestly talented chief executives and directors. They have no idea either, and so they reliably spend the money on the one thing that is dear to them - their children.  Which is why excessive riches matter in a democracy. Wealth is the foundation of a self-perpetuating aristocracy, an &eacute;lite whose entry is denied to those without the entry fee, the heart of the famous critique on equality made by Tawney. A fair society, he wrote, requires 'not only an open road but an equal start'. A just civilisation in which we can all be at ease with ourselves is built not on the possibility of having the right to attain happiness, but on the unequivocal right to happiness. We must spread wealth around, as Tawney saw, otherwise we reinvent the structured injustice of medieval Europe. It is our children, facing sky-high property prices and no chance of ownership in the &eacute;lite's part of town   unless their parents are super-rich who will feel Tawney's warnings about injustice much more than us.  The Third-Way consensus is that the best we can do is to alleviate these trends. We have no contemporary Tawney, whose basic argument is dismissed as impractical and unrealistic. Who can tax or obstruct the march of the super-rich in an age of globalisation?  Yet last week saw hope from an unexpected quarter. Adair Turner, former director-general of the CBI and vice chair of the same City bank from which Galley and Zimmerman are departing, has robustly dismissed the idea that governments are helpless and cannot redistribute income as Tawney would want. In his new book,  Just Capitalism , he argues that successful capitalism is much more subtle than simply permitting a Darwinian struggle in which the rich run off with all the prizes. It is about being embedded in a civilisation that works, where judges and permanent secretaries are valued no less highly than those who superintend financial transactions in the City.  It is even more than that; friendship, solidarity and even kindness rest on the notion that we share. As Aristotle said, there is no friendship among the unequal. It is a measure of how far we have fallen that not one ranking politician in the Labour Party dares to make this argument. One day, surely, someone will.