Gordon Brown's budget was a  Labour budget, one of its behind-the-scenes architects informed me. And it was good. It directed substantial new cash at Britain's poorest working families; it raised real spending next year on health and education by 8 and 9 per cent respectively. It promised big increases in health for the years afterwards that will surely be matched in education. And in choosing the Budget speech, the hallowed text devoted only to taxation, to announce a gigantic £2 billion of extra funding for the NHS, the Chancellor could not have made a more dramatic statement of Labour's political preferences. Labour prefers to spend cash on improving the quality of public services to tax cuts. The Tories do not. It is a politically defining moment.  More than that, Brown is doing two things that have needlessly eluded the British Left for too long. He combines a political position at once sympathetic to entrepreneurship and business-building with a concern for social justice.  The social-democratic Left's position has always been that the dynamism of capitalism should be harnessed for the common good; that not only can you be simultaneously in favour both of making money and redistributing it, but that successful public services and help for the disadvantaged are predicated upon such capitalist vitality. Brown is living political proof that the syllogism works.  And he has built up such a strong financial position that he is able to turn   on the spending tap in Year Four of a parliament, unlike every other post-war Labour chancellor who has to had to launch painful spending cuts at this stage in the parliament. Moreover he has not had to soak the rich and middle classes to fund his ambitions. It is good, even very good; and it is hard to believe that the country can seriously contemplate electing the Tories, with their infantile approach to taxation and public spending, in Labour's place.  But if the central strategy is on the button, there are qualifications and reservations around the edges that explain why so many have had such serious doubts about New Labour. For a start Brown, for the third year running, has been dramatically caught out disguising the lusty health of the public finances in the name of prudence. This time last year he said he would borrow £3bn in the financial year just ending, a forecast that looked implausibly pessimistic at the time; in the event he has repaid £12bn of the national debt.  He is congratulated for his probity - yet if the Treasury's forecasting had been remotely accurate the big build-up in public spending could have started a year ago. Financial 'prudence' has taken precedence over real lives. For some children in sink schools and NHS patients, that's a lost year which can never be brought back, and which so easily could have been avoided.  This time round we're asked to believe it's different, and that the combination of a big build-up in capital investment, growing by 33 per cent a year, and the projected increases in health spending will see the Government ceasing to pay off the national debt in 2002.  As for prudence, even if the economy grows 1 per cent a year less rapidly than the cautious central forecast of 2.25 per cent a year assumed by the Treasury, we needn't worry our heads. The surpluses will still be high enough for the Government to meet its own criteria for financial caution - already the toughest of any leading industrialised country.  Extraordinarily this understates Brown's strength, to which he will still not admit. Only on Friday the auction of the next generation of mobile phone licences had raised £4.5bn; when completed next month the auction will raise £10bn - at least £7.5bn more than Brown has included in the budget projections. Not since Drake's Golden Hind moored in the pool of London laden with Spanish gold has any British government been as unexpectedly rich as this.  What this means, amazingly, is that Brown could do much, much more. He could index the growth of social security benefits to wages rather than the much lower growth in prices. He could scrap the disabling Private Finance Initiative, which has so shrunk the size of new hospitals for example, and relegitimise public-private partnerships by putting the public sector in the financial driving seat in deals with the private sector. Cuts in incapacity benefit could be restored. The scope for jury trial could be extended rather than narrowed, and the capacity of Britain's creaking courts doubled. The science budget could be made the most generous in Europe. The road and rail system could be made world-class. And with never a further rise in any tax rate.  So far only the NHS has been formally allowed to share in the bounty. Health expenditure is set to rise for the three years after next by 5.6 per cent in real terms, to give a four-year increase of 6.1 per cent - three times the real growth in NHS spending between 1992 and 1998.  Although education spending is slated to fall back again next year, according to the old forecasts, the inside steer is to expect the growth in edu cation spending to match health. But if we are to believe Brown's numbers, the implication is that the rest of the public sector will continue to be squeezed - with current spending on housing, law and order, transport and the rest only growing by 1.6 per cent in real terms to allow for the growth in health and education.  If Brown does allow such a squeeze, his only let-out will be that the economy will have got so close to full capacity that any more spending would be inflationary. But even that argument would be dubious. There is scope to increase taxes, notably reforming council tax so that it becomes a proper progressive tax on property, that would allow increased spending while withdrawing demand from the economy. Brown holds every fiscal ace.  The question-mark is over the scope of his progressive ambition. In this budget, for example, he offered nothing to advance the cause of Lord Roger's urban task force; no taxation of greenfield development - no incentive for brownfield development. He backed off the Cruickshank report's call for regulating the ludicrously high monopoly profits the banks make from operating the cheque-clearing system.  He caved in to Eurosceptics and the City's desire to become the world centre of tax avoidance by the abolition of withholding tax on international bonds. And he has, over the past few months, been less than progressive about both BBC funding and the minimum wage. Not so good.  But the central point stands. Last week we saw why Blair tolerates his brooding Heathcliff of a Chancellor. He delivers. And it takes an obsessive to have the self-discipline and rigour to have put the British Left where it now is. We all have ideas about how we would spend Brown's largesse. But it took Gordon to get us here.