A Royal Duty<br /> by Paul Burrell<br /> 416pp, Michael Joseph, £17.99   Camilla: An Intimate Portrait<br />by Rebecca Tyrrel <br />192pp, Short Books, £14.99<br />  The latest dollop of treachery and scandal arrives after such lavish tabloid serialisation that there must be the usual suspicion that nothing remotely interesting was left over for the book. Not so. As well as dishing his enemies, Paul Burrell has a terrific story of his own to tell. It begins, like all the most satisfying romantic sagas, among unsanitary back-to-backs in a Derbyshire pit village and proceeds, via pantries and yachts and a tragic death in Paris, to a cliff-hanging trial where, in a shocking but just reversal of fortune, princes are humbled and the butler's tormentors, the Spencers, are brought low. Had Burrell found himself a more skilful ghostwriter, it could also have been a terrific read.  Still, strewn through Burrell's disorganised, often flaky memoirs - part therapy and part history, part gossip and part eulogy - are treasurable descriptions of the domestic life of the weird and helpless Windsors. Prince Charles comes out of it worst, as babyish, bereft of self-control and quite incapable, when it comes to Burrell's arrest, of establishing where his own family's best interests might lie (in soothing the butler, not throwing him to the police). In fact it seems entirely consistent with their habit of getting things dynamically wrong that the royal family should, in the current case, have objected to the most anodyne revelations. It is widely known that Diana accumulated suitors with the same enthusiasm she applied to collecting witty cushions and enamelled boxes, yet it was this statement of the biographically obvious that prompted the princes to accuse Burrell of a "cold and overt betrayal" and to demand a meeting in which to rebuke the upstart face to face.   Why the fuss? Earlier books - including one by Diana's secretary, Patrick Jephson, another by her policeman, Ken Wharfe, and the two contributions from her lover, James Hewitt - have explored the boyfriend theme in lubricious detail. Burrell, who is much keener to sound dignified, especially given his new calling as Diana's historian, does not just airbrush her romantic life, he is at his most ponderously genteel when testifying to initial married bliss: "True love, for that was what it was on both sides, survived a difficult adjustment in the early years ..."   Considering that this is the only volume of Diana revelations to have been written by a still-ardent Diana admirer, one explanation for the royal family's unusually vigorous response is that it is even stupider than anyone had imagined. Another is that it has been stung, as it has not been since the horror of Crawfie's The Little Princesses, at the below-stairs effrontery of the whole thing. Burrell started working for them, aged 18, as a pantry under-butler, or washer-upper. Such nonentities, he discloses, are not permitted to look their employers in the eye. They are not allowed to walk down the middle of the Buckingham Palace corridor carpets. At Balmoral, they are not even allowed to watch the television when the royals are out (Princess Margaret would check to see if the set was warm). They are certainly not allowed to write books exposing a feudal master-servant relation which, according to this account, is still enforced in even the most enlightened royal establishments.   Burrell learned that his first duty was invisibility: "At Sandringham House, maids would dart into a walk-in cupboard under the stairs so as not to be seen when the Queen was coming down the stairs." Such observations should not be interpreted as revolutionary stirrings, for Burrell became devoted to his work, which came with oceans of illicit gin and a nice view of the Mall. From his time as footman to the Queen, who has senior servants to enforce her household's petty despotism, Burrell offers only affecting episodes designed, like Crawfie's effusions, to show our fairminded and dutiful monarch in a yet more gracious light. Prince Philip - tough but fair - receives his first good press in half a century as counsellor to Diana, while the union between these paragons is presented, in contrast to many recent accounts, as a model to us all: "I never once heard a raised voice between husband and wife ..."   How unlike home life at Highgrove, where, after becoming butler, Burrell found that his duties also included spying, the supplying of alibis and the general facilitation of royal adultery. It was his refusal to fib to Diana, Burrell claims, that prompted Charles to throw a book at him, shouting: "I will be King." How Charles must regret this now. Had it not been for the book-throwing, we might never have learned that this questing intellectual is unable to squeeze his own toothpaste (even with the help of a crested silver toothpaste key), requires his standard to be raised on the roof the moment he arrives at Highgrove, and is an incessant leaver of memos, some of which have, unaccountably, found their way into this volume: "A letter from the Queen must have fallen by accident into the wastepaper basket beside the table in the library. Please look for it."   Not that Diana emerges much more creditably from Burrell's memoirs of Kensington Palace. For all his attempts to depict her as a selfless and enlightened philanthropist, her treatment of servants was, in its over-familiar way, quite as abusive as the Windsors' and more capricious. Progressive ideas did not stop Diana expecting Burrell to lean over and fasten her seatbelt - a detail which may be rather more telling than her prophecy of an assassination attempt. On the other hand, the absence of any boundaries allowed her to send him to Coventry, subject him to interminable mobile phone chats, and get him to chauffeur her on charitable excursions to prostitutes, and to deliver love-notes at midnight. Although Burrell plainly got a tremendous thrill from the camp, girly aspects of her dependency - sharing the sunbed, shrieking over gossip, picking outfits - he can still summon up enough objectivity to see that her enslavement of his entire life was not really very humanitarian at all. Or as his wife, the mother of their two young boys, told him: "She had you by the balls in her lifetime, and she's still got you by the balls now."   Now Burrell would appear to enjoy a similarly unhealthy relationship with the royal family. Since his strongest material is their own inability to treat servants as fully human, this is not a situation for which he can entirely be blamed. It still escapes this hopeless clan that attacks on their runaway slave are likely to sting him into further disclosures. Burrell's exalted sense of duty, as keeper of the Diana flame, might even provide the excuse for the release of more prince-relatedtittle-tattle from his decades of invisibility. If this won't deprive Charles of his throne, it could still scupper any plans for marrying his mistress. As for Burrell: his claims to be record-keeping should be resisted until he is more open about his sources. Where do all these letters come from?   Thanks to the butler, it will probably be some time before we see much more of Mrs Parker Bowles, for whom things were going so swimmingly a few weeks ago that she appeared at a fashion gala and, rather cunningly, posed next to Donatella Versace. Next to Ms Versace, anyone who has not actually been embalmed appears to wholesome advantage. At the same time, the publication of Rebecca Tyrrel's new portrait of Camilla depicts her as a woman who, for all her superficial deficiencies, is stolid enough to make a very serviceable royal wife.   In one of Burrell's many borrowings from other people's correspondence, Prince Philip tells Diana that no one in their right mind would leave her for Camilla. Now, thanks to Tyrrel's exhaustive exploration of the what-does-he-see-in-her question, we can be fairly sure that we will never know the answer. There is nothing there to see.   Unlike her boyfriend and his brainy mentors, Camilla is not cultivated, soulful, intellectual or interested in the King James Bible. Or Shakespeare, or architecture, or history teaching, or ecosystems, or Islam, or the holistic approach to life. Unlike Diana, who played Rachmaninov and drew up lists of impressive words and spiritual consolations, Camilla shows no inclination to improve herself. One source told Tyrrel: "She doesn't share many of his artistic tastes. She'll say at a Highgrove dinner, 'This isn't going to be one of those bloody musical evenings, is it?'" Even Camilla's occasional production of watercolours should not - Tyrrel emphasises for the uninitiated - be mistaken for artistic endeavour, being rather a naff "home counties pastime - as home counties as a conservatory extension and a barbecue terrace". Her other known artistic enthusiasms are EastEnders and the Goons. Plus horses, dogs, fishing, gardening, gin, idleness and sex.   Leave aside the last hobby, factor in the unabashed lushery, the TS Eliot baiting and the love of jewels and parties, and you realise that, in Camilla, Charles has found a reincarnation of the late Queen Mother. That very well-loved Queen. A Queen exposed in Burrell's book as extremely disagreeable to servants.