The Natural History of the Rich: A Field Guide <br /> by Richard Conniff 320pp, Heinemann, £16.99    Richard Conniff's previous books were populist natural history compilations about rats (Rats!), invertebrates (Spineless Wonders) and repulsive aspects of animal behaviour (Every Creeping Thing). So although he presents  The Natural History of the Rich as quite a career change, the project was not such a departure, really, from those explorations of the ickier reaches of the animal kingdom.  Alas, as regular readers of Hello! will be aware, the richer members of the human race are generally less fascinating than, for instance, houseflies, which as Conniff has noted, are able to register changes in light 10 times faster than, say, Richard Branson, as well as being better at flying. It might have livened up his account had Conniff emulated Jane Goodall, and studied a remote colony of rich people over time, at close quarters, or even focused intently on an individual specimen, as comparative psychologists once did with Washoe the chimp.   But Conniff's style is more to goggle, then, not very interestingly, to generalise. His examples of rich-person behaviour are inert with overfamiliarity, even when they result from a special field trip. It is as if David Attenborough had descended in his harness from the rainforest canopy with the news that nine out of ten cats prefer Whiskas. Returning from Longleat, Conniff discloses that the Marquess of Bath has mistresses he describes as "wifelets". A visit to Monaco confirms that Princess Stephanie's low-life romances have made her an embarrassment to her family. Just fancy.   For what it is worth, however, Conniff may well be the first writer to compare Princess Stephanie's conduct with that of "young females in the animal world", such as chimpanzees. In fact, as with many of his learned, animal-world allusions, there is no parallel, useful or otherwise, to be drawn. The princess's liaisons with her social inferiors are ostentatious. Among chimpanzees such mating is likely to be clandestine so that it can be concealed from proprietorial   alpha males. No matter; it is by scattering his book with irrelevant fragments from studies of animal behaviour that Conniff hopes to educate us about rich people, approaching them as if he were a cross between a naturalist and an anthropologist.   The rich, at least, must be gratified by his attention. If low ranking chimpanzees could write tributes to their social superiors instead of crouching submissively with downbent head, they would probably turn out very similar to Conniff's awed account of the tastes and habits of the wealthy. "At the very least," he says, in a vain attempt to justify his interest, "our shared behavioural and biological tendencies matter considerably more when they express themselves in the lives of the rich." No they don't. Much of the time he is patently dazzled, drooling over this "beautiful property", or that "seriously impressive" house, before dutifully slotting in some real-estate or superfluous-display related animal analogy. Bower birds, as you might imagine, perform sterling service.   Conniff also notes the presence of any attractive girl, or as naturalists apparently describe this commodity, "arm candy". Having asserted that the rich are so different that they constitute a "pseudo species", whose behaviour needs interpreting to the rest of us, Conniff spends a good part of his book serially contradicting himself. "Dominance," he concedes, "is by no means the exclusive prerogative of the rich." They just exercise it in a way he finds more impressive. Apparently, such self-abasement is in our genes: "Fitting into the hierarchy gives us a sense of security, and so we get a special pleasure from serving the people at the top."   If we must ransack the annals of animal behaviour to enhance our understanding of mankind, then the environs of the rich are, perhaps, the least promising place to look for parallels. The acquisition of wealth has no animal equivalent: animals do not hoard except, as Conniff explains, as a matter of survival. But even if this new branch of natural history had any value, there would have to be doubts about the authority of a guide who, as he does, believes in the existence of a creature called Princess Fergie.