The Hungry Gene: The Science of Fat and the Future of Thin<br />by Ellen Ruppel Shell<br />309pp, Atlantic, £17.99 It is hard to imagine anyone more sympathetic towards overweight people than Ellen Ruppel Shell, but even she concedes that the wistful allusions of pro-fatness campaigners to various better, kinder, eras - when fat was just adorable, when outside every thin person there was a ginormous person struggling to get in - are pretty much a figment. Not since the nugget-starved Europe of 25,000BC have spherical types such as the Venus of Willendorf generally enjoyed the aesthetic edge over ectomorphs. "Truth be told," Shell says, concluding the illuminating little history of overweight with which she opens The Hungry Gene, "obesity (as opposed to Rubensesque plumpness) had not been fashionable since the Stone Age." And yet there are so very many obese people now: about 1.1 billion adults, all courting heart disease and diabetes, premature death and ridicule. How this epidemic of obesity came about, and what might be done to cure it, are announced as the central questions of Shell's book. Although, rather frustratingly, she never answers either one, her fatness investigations abound in interesting, if sometimes conflicting, stories about the epidemic and the characters who, one way or another, want to profit from it. Obesity, as a US businessman told Shell, is the "trillion dollar disease", one which, in her engaging account of obesity research, attracts both the most highminded scientists, eager to save lives, and the most buccaneering of their colleagues, keen to make a killing. Shell, an American science writer, has a droll manner and narrative gift that transforms the most unpromising chapters of obesity R&amp;D into observant little dramas, in which the very fat cells are individuals and laboratory mice get cameo roles. Of the corpulent mutant whose fatness first persuaded scientists that the cause of obesity might be organic rather than behavioural, Shell writes: "Rather than dart around the cage in mousy abandon, it was docile,   phlegmatic, as though resigned to some unspeakable fate." Quite a realist, then, your obese mouse. Anthropomorphised by Shell, the scientists are almost as entertaining as their specimens. The undoubted star is one Jeffrey Friedman, who, we learn, "is to ambition what the ocean is to wet". Friedman somehow managed to get all the the credit, and most of the cash for, locating an appetite-regulating gene he named leptin, whose absence transformed a normal mouse into the fatty and desolate blob we met above. Long before this discovery was formally published as "Positional cloning of the mouse obese gene and its human homologue", Friedman had carefully auctioned his patent to the highest bidder. While colleagues who collaborated on crucial stages of leptin research got sums Shell describes as modest, she estimates Friedman's reward as "between $5m and $6m". Which is pretty good, when you consider that leptin alone did not turn out to be the fat person's saviour. Appetite regulation turns out to be a little more complicated  than that. Maybe, it is now speculated, fat people's leptin levels are okay, but their leptin receptors aren't functioning properly. "It is possible," Shell speculates, "that a particular diet - perhaps a high-fat diet - can muffle the leptin signal..." It is. Though why, if fat is so seductive, should it muffle signals for so many more poor people than affluent ones? Shell finds "many sound economic reasons for this, among them that the cost of calorie-dense processed food has steadily decreased, while work and living environments have become increasingly mechanised". So persuasive is Shell in her depiction of obese people as hapless victims of their diet and brain chemistry, that you can only hope she never applies her talents on behalf of some of the other people who attribute their problems to wiring rather than will-power failure. Is it possible that philanderers' or vandals' brains are also different from other people's? If so, should not they, like the overeaters formerly known as gluttons, receive her absolution? Although it seems unlikely that the giants of the US food industry could actually have set out to fuddle our overtaxed leptin receptors, Shell comes up with so many examples of their dastardly, obesity-inducing antics, that you wouldn't put it past them. An industry that launches relentless assaults on the minds of infant consumers, and comes up with something as vile as "no-think foods" or seven-times daily "feedings" to fatten up an already bloated nation of indolent adults, would stop at nothing. As Shell rightly says, we should resist it. Her plan is not, however, for us individually to disdain the industry's fat- and sugar-loaded garbage (for "the obesity pandemic is less a matter of individual differences than of societal pressures") but to fight it with public health campaigns that "make explicit the link between inactivity, junk food consumption, and obesity". And then what? By the end of this fascinating and impeccably forgiving book, the fact that the individual consumer is still, up to a point, the final arbiter between burger and carrot, flopping and walking - fat and not-fat - looks like an affirmation of the human spirit.