Love Works Like This: Travels Through a Pregnant Year <br />by Lauren Slater <br />224pp, Bloomsbury, £9.99   The expression "I'm mad, me" might have been invented for the psychologist Lauren Slater, who has built a thriving literary career on accounts of her episodes of mental illness. Her first, most impressive book, a study of chronic schizophrenic patients called  Welcome to My Country , owed much of its originality to the author's personal testimony, offered, she explained, to show how fragile are the boundaries between patient and doctor: "When, Marie, Joseph, Peter, Moxi, Oscar, when I weep for you, don't forget I weep as well for me."  Since then, stable on Prozac, Slater has focused pretty much exclusively on her own pathology, with  Prozac Diary  and  Lying . She writes fluently about her experiences of an awesomely wide range of mental disorders, from anorexia to obsessive-compulsive behaviour, from kleptomania to seizures, from self-mutilation to telling lies, and her fantastic self-absorption is often as diverting for the healthy but inquisitive as it must be enlightening for those with more serious reasons for wanting to learn from her history.   You never know just what she'll do next. On one very bad day in her new book, a pregnancy diary, she decides to take it out on the trees in her backyard. "The oaks oppress me, so muscular and judgmental." She calls a tree man to get them cut down. He asks if she's crazy. "'Yes', I say, and that shuts him up, very fast." It would, wouldn't it? (Rather typically, Slater does not stick with the anecdote long enough to disclose whether or not the trees did pay the ultimate price.)   So this memoir is quite endearing and probably quite comforting for anyone unfortunate enough, like her, to have to get   through pregnancy on a cocktail of Prozac ("at a megadose"), lithium and something called Klonopin, which has apparently led to abnormalities in the offspring of Klonopin-treated rabbits. Slater, who at first stopped taking Prozac when she became pregnant and subsequently suffered an acute decline in her mental health, appears to have had little choice - other than to have an abortion - about ingesting this fearful pharmacopeia, and you rejoice with her when her baby, Eva Claire, finally emerges healthy into the world. For fans it is a typical Slater success story: the florid minutiae of mental illness recollected in creative composure.   For those pregnant women she considers her target audience, the memoir may have less to offer. "I hope," she begins, "it will be of help to, or at least keep company with, women who find themselves in the long wait between conception and parenthood." It is a long wait, particularly for leisured first-time mothers, and the curious shortage of accomplished literature about it makes almost any offering more useful than not. But Slater's diary, with its authentically crazy mood swings, proudly recounted anecdotes of lurid behaviour and its central question - "Can a mentally ill woman be a good mother?" - makes an eccentric guide to the experience. Inevitably, the question of her capacity for motherhood does not go away, having not, strangely enough, been very fully explored before she became pregnant. Only after she conceived did Slater draw up a list of pros and cons of child-bearing, finding only one pro ("learning a new kind of love"), but many cons. Concluding the memoir with an excruciatingly affected letter to her infant daughter, she confesses: "I still don't know the answer . . . All I do know is that my life has been marked, and marred, by gaps of dysfunctions . . . "   And the pregnancy is, of course, of a piece with her non-pregnant life. While the average western mother might be fretting about an inadvertent mouthful of soft cheese, Slater is evaluating the literature on Prozac-related foetal abnormalities, or hearing voices, or feuding with the garden foliage. The whole point of a writer like this, who advertises her craziness, is her ostentatious abnormality. Had her illness   remained in abeyance you suspect that hers would still have been a pregnancy like no other. As she announces of her non-ring-wearing marriage to a man called Jacob: "We do not nod to convention." Even when she considers something as inoffensive and non-mental health-related as buggies, it is her sworn duty to find something idiosyncratic to say: "I do not want a stroller. I would rather push my offspring in a wheel-barrow ..." And where experience cannot differentiate her pregnancy from the norm, the kind of fine writing that makes a nipple into a "membranous spigot" does the job instead.   Still, there are some ways in which her pregnancy cannot but resemble everyone else's. She's sick; she's forgetful; she can't get off to sleep. She thinks ungenerous thoughts about her husband. She has some routine feminist doubts. All this is adroitly done. She goes to an ante-natal class, where an exchange of smug idiocies about natural birth prompts some stinging observations from our drug-drenched mother-to-be: "You want to live close to your instincts? You want to roll in the mud like a pig? You want to give up your car and that silk pantsuit you're wearing?"   There are many moments, and they tend not to be the ones when Lauren Slater is telling her dreams or retaking her emotional temperature, when she is really very good, and by no means unsympathetic.