This will not be a war like other wars. George Bush has said that. Tony Blair confirms it. All relevant spokesmen for the American political establishment keep saying it, partly to ready American minds for casualties they haven't seen in any war since Vietnam. But this shift of definition changes other things as well. A new kind of war invites a new kind of discussion of war. If you're not with us you're against us, says Mr Bush. That may be true for the moment. I'm happy to say where I stand. But in all circumstances? For indefinite years? Whatever is happening? Until victory is achieved? These questions beg too many others. Other wars were indeed different. In Britain, the Falklands war is being cited as an earlier test of character and solidarity that the British did not fail, a model we're now obliged to follow if we're made of the right stuff. But the Falklands invasion raised a simple issue. Recovering the islands was an end you could agree with or reject. Either you thought it was essential in the national interest and in defence of international values, or you damned it as a Ruritanian folly. Whatever, it was going to be over quickly, with a result that nobody could find confusing.  The Gulf war and, especially, Kosovo were also quite like that. In each the end was clear. There may have been debate about the merit of those ends, but in each place they were measurable and attainable. Over Kosovo, argument against the merits of the bombing campaign still goes on, usually skirting past the inconvenient arrest of Slobodan Milosevic as a war-aim eventually attained. But it was the end as much as the means that divided European electorates. The moral fervour of first Mrs Thatcher and then Tony Blair, challenging the patriotism of their opponents, was rooted in a recognisable simplicity. Along with George Bush I and Bill Clinton, they, and we, knew what they were after and how they were going to get it.  The war against Osama bin Laden and the Taliban will not be like that. Outside the targets themselves and their close allies, there is virtually no dispute about the ends. The objective, of destroying terrorism worldwide, has almost no critics. Among rational states and citizens of the modern world - a group that has allied itself into an enormous force, under American leadership - it is considered hardly worth arguing about. Fascist Islam deserves no quarter. The enemy is palpable if not visible. There is wide understanding of the need for economic, political, intelligence and military collaboration to be ranged against him.  This does not, however, make the war a simple matter. The only simplicity is shown by those now determined to make war a loyalty test and nothing else, braying their belligerence and affirming their demand that critical faculties be suppressed. These people contend that since the end is unquestionably right, further discussion can only assist the enemy and, as such, be proof of anti-Americanism. Yet in the Taliban war, the most sincere supporters of the end can have legitimate doubts about the means. Our anxieties need expressing to our leaders, the more so since our leaders, under a thin veneer of confidence, obviously share them.  A senior Whitehall official, for example, told the Daily Telegraph yesterday: "One of the things that has been holding us up is the lack of good intelligence on where Bin Laden is. He is very clever and he is moving around a lot." This piercing insight casts a troubling light on the war's first modality, getting Bin Laden dead or alive. It is certainly correct. It's the first of many elementary points that make it impossible to see the Taliban war as appropriate merely for the postures of common righteousness.  Most action, in fact, will be hard to justify unless it is unreally precise. Nor is there anything simple about the consequences of action. All need great delicacy of consideration. The means towards the agreed end are fraught with difficulty. There's nothing anti-American in pointing out that a misguided missile strike could kill innocents by the hundred; or that ill-directed attacks could soon fragment the anti-Taliban alliance; or that Saudi Arabia, America's vital ally in the region, is intensely vulnerable to a wrong call; or that Pakistan could be overwhelmed by the about-turn it has been forced to make; or that more terrorist outrages are as likely to be provoked by doing something as doing nothing; or that, come what may, the humanitarian calamity will exceed anything yet seen.  These are legitimate issues. As each day passes, they become more obviously pressing, to the point of banality. I'm sure they preoccupy those who are about to launch military attack as much as they concern newspaper writers and readers. Heavily though Mr Bush and Mr Blair talk about the mighty forces assembled to take out the Taliban, as an alternative to the capture of Bin Laden, there's a real possibility that they will fail to change much that matters in the global contest against terrorism. This is not Desert Storm, and never will be. Mr Bush and Mr Blair must know that. For us to be aware of the gloomy possibilities seems a more helpful contribution to the agony the civilised world now faces than demanding dumb unity behind a strategy that's likely to require constant adjustment.  For now, I think there's no choice. Terrorism has become the least negotiable threat to peace and safety the world has ever seen. Its possibilities are on the verge of causing mass depression, both mental and economic. Our leaders urge calm in the face of chemical and biological menaces, but these have become ominously real. An enemy of humanity who recognises no restraints, no rules, no humanity of his own, is a new kind of enemy. At least the places where he was last known to have gathered in his hundreds, the Bin Laden bases in Afghanistan, need to be wiped out. The economic tourniquet that Mr Bush has begun to tighten, with international support, is another elementary instrument.  One cannot expect 20-20 targeting. There will be mistakes we'll have to live with. Innocent people are sure to die if they haven't got out of the bases. Replacing the Taliban with oppositionist gunmen, if that's the game-plan, will be frustrating at every stage. It's the logic Bin Laden has invited. Those in America and Europe who oppose all military intervention, sincerely anti-terrorist though they are, are jumping off the nasty, brutish, real world.  But that's only the start. We have to hope some significant terror networks are broken. We should reject, though, the blackmail of seamless continuity which says that after Afghanistan, win or lose, come Iraq/Syria/ Lebanon as the next candidates for all-out war. Every stage needs to be open to revision and recoil before the facts as they emerge. This is not a conventional war, to be prosecuted with the conventional unblinking commitment to the one true path. There will be no one true path. Nor can there be one voice imposing, under pain of treachery, the claim that there is.