The caricature of Britain says she is unconditionally loyal to America. The caricature of France says she is congenitally the opposite. These pictures are framed not just by the critics of each nation, but by the countries themselves. The British establishment quite likes to be seen that way, and so does the French, when the Europe-America relationship is the question of the hour. Each tends to play to its stereotype, which is not, however, always true to reality. In this hour - now, this era - it's about as helpful as the outpourings of the boneheads in high editorial command at the Times and the Telegraph, who are already seeking to banish open discussion of the crisis by demonising as an idiot or a coward anyone who asks an intelligent question about what to do next.  The national caricatures are especially misleading now. Cultivated by watchful vigilantes on the right, they miss a larger point. Far from being separated, the countries of Europe are united as never before. They are all behaving sensibly. They face an opportunity they've never previously seized to become, as a collective, a vital force in the politics of the world: and thereby to be not just a half-resentful accomplice of Washington but an equal allied partner in determining the conditions of future existence.  In the past week, the bombing of New York wasn't the only event without precedent. When Nato formally invoked its own treaty obligation to defend America, it did so unanimously and without   hesitation. It never did that before. A major segment of the global alliance that is vital if this novel kind of enemy is to be smashed was immediately committed: a different story from what happened in the slow and agonising process of alliance-building before the 1990-91 Gulf war.  The EU, meanwhile, has moved into a new gear. Officials concerned with justice and home affairs have had several meetings with American counterparts, described to me yesterday as intense and productive. In particular, Europe has dramatically adjusted its approach to terrorism. Previously there has been reluctance to collaborate. Germany, Italy, Spain and Britain all have spectacular experience with domestic terrorism, but some countries, including this one, have insisted on treating it differently from money-laundering and drug-running, and retaining it largely as a problem to be handled nationally. Inside a week, this has begun to change. The new crisis has awakened everyone to the need to act together not apart, a model that could, by the propaganda of the deed, reshape Europe as we have known it.  For America needs allies. Despite the big talk from Richard Perle and others about going it alone, the anti-terrorist operation cannot conceivably succeed without them. Every time Colin Powell and Donald Rumsfeld say it will take years not weeks, they underline that. The effort has to engage the solidarity of every country not itself beholden to fanatic enclaves, with a determination to pressure those that harbour   them. For that to work, the alliance needs to be about politics as much as military security, a project that involves France as much as Britain, in which there is no reason to suppose any EU country will fall short. At its root is a pledge that absolves America from the need for unilateral action - but also a requirement that America, being the leader of an alliance it cannot do without, listens to what Europe has to say.  This doesn't pose Europe as the soft relation to America's hard man. Europe is committed to taking all appropriate means to wipe out terrorism. That's a serious promise to engage in strategies that will cost governments and citizens heavily. Drying up terrorist funds will draw in mainline banks. Reprisals against Syria, Iran, Iraq and other havens will involve trade embargos that could make many European businesses suffer.  Explicitly taking sides behind Washington's rage against the bombers will expose citizens of European countries to risks of further terrorism. Signing up for a global police force against suicidal atrocity places any country on one side of the barricades that separate law from anti-law, and divide apologists for fundamentalism from defenders of the free   society. So it should. The choice cannot be blurred. The casuists of history mustn't be indulged by one iota in their demand to shape the future through righteous barbarism.  But Europe needs a voice. Its immediate collaboration earns it the right to be heard. The assent not merely of its governments but its citizens will be necessary if this long campaign is to be effective. Its familiarity with terrorist horrors, together with its historical experience of war on its soil, should give it some leverage, a balancing factor in the alliance, against the wilder demands for vengeance coming from the country that has been wounded like this for the first time. The sleeping giant aroused, rubbing its eyes with incredulity, doesn't necessarily have the clearest perspective.  For example, mere acts of vengeance carry terrible risks, yet the drum beat from Washington seems to be preparing for them. The issue should not be whether retaliation is proportionate, a favourite word, but whether it is precise. Proportionate attacks could justify killing 10,000 innocent Afghan citizens: easy, but indefensible. Precise attacks mean hitting Osama bin Laden's terror network: essential, but very elusive.  Europe's job is surely to solemnise all the warnings it can muster, from behind its allegiance to the project, that the wrong kind of onslaught will make the crisis worse, not better: deepening fundamentalism, radicalising moderate Arabs, disengaging their governments from the proper course.   Similarly, it may be for Europe to point out more lucidly than ranking American politicians can that the winners of this war so far have been terrorists with penknives. A hi-tech assault that neither finds nor destroys the chief suspect will be another victory for the men with knives: a national humiliation, destined only to intensify the lust for battle on both sides. This scenario is absolutely to be avoided. Yet it sits there, in danger of being risked by a country that for too long underestimated its vulnerability to domestic terrorism, and by a president trying to compensate for his early dithering, as well as the perception that when we needed another Franklin Roosevelt we may have got an ersatz Warren Harding.  Whether Europeans will be drawn into the fighting, it is premature to say. They're aware they might be, another reason to insist the chosen battleground makes sense. This is not just an issue for the ever-battle-ready British. Joschka Fischer said sombrely at the weekend that Germany had excluded no possibilities.  The large point is that Europe is united as to the scale of the threat that fundamentalism has declared it can make, and the priority that attaches to trying to beat it. There may be nuances of difference as to how to go about that. There ought to be more than nuances against some of the follies being demanded in corners of America. But so far, the alliance has shown itself behaving as it should, and better than it has ever been required to.