The easy thing to say is that all is well. Baritone America sends out oak-smoked voices of reassurance. Embassies tell us the system has emerged triumphant. The result will hold, the people will support it, the country will unite, democracy is secured. The US, we're told, is bigger that any of the puzzles that could not be resolved in the last five weeks. Now the definitive answer is declared. There's no meltdown in the markets, no army in the streets. Election 2000 was just a blip on history's screen. I'm afraid this is not true. The election has been a calamity without precedent. Its result is unacceptable, will not be accepted by large numbers of Americans. What they see before them is the brute fact of several thousand uncounted votes that would have made a difference. That's a detail everyone can understand. Beyond the legal argument, the twists and turns of what might or might not be constitutional, the prohibition on counting all the votes has an elemental simplicity. Nobody will forget it. Democracy, quite simply, was poisoned to put George W Bush in the White House.  So were most of the institutions this election touched: presidency, federal court, state court, state officialdom, election invigilators, the very mechanism of balloting itself. The US Congress, it might be said, was an exception. Its elections were decided fair and square. But it is in the divided theatre of the Congress that the bitterness to which this flawed process has   given rise will now, with untamed ferocity, be played out.  One institution is damaged worse than any other. The circumstances of Bush's election may make him weak for four years, but they will corrupt the reputation of the US supreme court, which presided over their working-out, far beyond that. At the moment when the country needed the timeless, almost sacred qualities the court alone has habitually supplied, these were withheld at best by perverted legalism, at worst by a partisanship that was as righteous as it was, of course, unadmitted.  Previous cases put the court in the same white-hot cauldron of political controversy, and did not find it wanting. Over both the Pentagon Papers and Watergate, presidents had everything at stake, but the court's intervention was not seen as political. Its reputation wasn't threatened but enhanced. In those days, the political provenance of the justices was seldom an issue, because enough of them quickly established a pattern of judicial behaviour at odds with what their presidential appointers expected. They rose above their origins. They became demonstrably dispassionate. They did judicial not political things. Public trust in them deepened.  The case of Gore v Bush has ruined this trust, as some of Tuesday night's judgments regretfully acknowledged. Taking the case in the first place was a political act, transgressing the court's historic restraints against interfering in state elections. It came peculiarly from a rightwing court, whose thrust under   Chief Justice Rehnquist has been in favour of states' rights on all matters. Such a deviation from their norm showed that politics had well and truly triumphed over intellect.  The process continued right to the end, with the final judgment of the majority in the 5-4 split. The effect was best depicted by the other side. The majority strained every intellectual muscle to smash the credibility of the Florida supreme court, which had said that counting votes was what mattered and had ordered it to be resumed. By endorsing Mr Bush's attack on the impartiality of the Florida judges, Justice Stevens said, "the majority of this court can only lend credence to the most cynical appraisal of judges throughout this land". There might be no clear winner of the election, he added, but the identity of the loser was clear: "It is the nation's confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law."  For this terrible verdict, the Bush campaign is substantially responsible. The Gore people were not blameless. They stopped at nothing in the titanic political struggle. But Bush, who had assailed Gore's use of the courts, then deployed them himself every   time it looked as though the votes might start to be fully counted. His entire purpose was to ensure that a proper count, rectifying the defects of the machines, did not take place. That's the legacy he's stuck with. It will be perhaps the only merit in the victory of this strangely unformed, inadequate man. He must now somehow make sense of the anti-democratic whirlwind which he was mainly responsible for sowing. His partisanship, rather than the other guy's, now faces the challenge of converting itself into leadership of the nation.  An irony lies behind this. Partisanship in America has never, in recent decades, been more destructive than it has now become. The two parties' activists view each other with hostility. Yet the issues that split them are quite narrow. There's no broad pervasive difference over the economic or social principles by which America should be run. Every Republican and Democrat is a full-blooded capitalist. They may typically disagree about guns and abortion and, to some extent, about tax. But Bush and Gore spent the campaign not emphasising these differences, with the exception of tax, but burying them, in attempts to appeal to the swinging voters whose very elusiveness consists in the fact that they are not partisan at all.  The partisanship, in other words, is essentially personal. It is about tribe, power and possession, not about ideas. It sits on top of a country that does not disagree about very much, but has just exhibited an unfortunate capacity for dividing its vote precisely   down the middle - a reflection not of how different the parties are, but how little there is to choose between them.  This ought to be material a new president could work with. The nation is not profoundly at odds with itself. Though there's a rough geographical divide between one faction and another, the heart of America contains the stuff of compromise - more so than Britain or continental Europe, with their ideological parties. But the American system, and its political class on both sides, are the enemies of that. Neither the system nor the class serves the people well. For all his bitter denunciations of Washington, Mr Bush will be a president who got there as the product of that system and the creature of that class. The public's trust that he truly represents them will be almost impossible to muster.  The strength of the court used to be that, when all else failed, such trust continued to repose there at least. But when Bush embarks on his task, a bastion of the American system will be missing. Its purity has been dismantled, at his command and with the connivance of five justices who let judgment surrender to politics. Justice Stevens said hopefully that "time will one day heal the wound". The trouble is that the inflicting of it has drawn blood that's only now beginning to flow. One of Bush's first ambitions may be to enlarge the majority that put him where he is. He's often said he wants more conservatives on the court. Thus is a pillar of the constitution felled.<BR><B>Key document</B><BR>  Download the Florida supreme court ruling (pdf file)<B>Related stories</B><BR>Timeline - when will America decide?  <BR>Election glossary  <BR>Graphic: Know your chad  <BR>  22 November: The chad debate - are dimples Gore's best hope?  <BR><B>Interactive</B><BR>  Results declared, state by state  <BR><B>Audio</B><BR>  Ed Vulliamy on Palm Beach (3mins 45)  <BR><B>Local media</B>  <BR> Miami Herald<BR>Tallahassee Democrat  <BR>Palm Beach Post  <BR>Sun Sentinel