It is tempting to believe a dead-heat result will produce a split-ticket outcome. Such patent indecision as the American electorate showed on Tuesday, breaking into two gigantic blocks with barely a hair's-breadth between them, should surely be reflected in a subsequent politics of bargain and compromise. That's how it would be in most other democratic countries. Even the Westminster parliament, with its winner-take-all voting system, is driven towards forms of power-sharing if the electorate doesn't supply a clear mandate. In the US presidential system, however, this has not happened, and never will. Nobody cares who came second for the presidency, any more than they care who lost the Olympic 400 metres by a hundredth of a second. Who remembers that, in 1992, 20m voters for Ross Perot, 19% of the electorate, failed to deprive Bill Clinton of a particle of his first mandate, as people perceived it? A winner is a winner, and he takes the only palm: all the baubles and power. It's not surprising that no precinct is being left unexamined   to decide who really won, even if the scrutiny takes a few days more.  The endgame matters enormously for another reason. One has to believe George W Bush is going to finish in the White House. He is, ostensibly and so far, the winner of this zero-sum contest. Meanwhile, the House and Senate have been held by the Republicans, against many confident predictions that one or other would fall. An all-Republican Washington beckons for the first time in nearly 50 years. The one agent of compromise that does impose itself in the US system - a potent one, when Congress and White House are at odds - will be missing. We're on the brink of a new Republican age, however crudely that fails to reflect the subtleties and hesitations of American opinion as shown in this election.  To sketch the shape of this new age, as the rest of the world must begin to see it, is to show how the unfinished business in Florida matters far beyond America. We glimpse emerging, for the first time, an American political class that could be on the verge of effecting a substantial shift in the postwar order.  Reasons not to expect that were heavy on the airwaves yesterday. Ambassadors and foreign secretaries uttered their ritual assurances, not least in Britain, where the special relationship is thought to possess a critical mass of historical inevitability that makes it proof against even a president who has not taken the slightest interest in foreign affairs or even visited this country. Any words of isolation or hints of disengagement that might have been uttered in the campaign, for example about Bosnia, were soothingly withdrawn.  The roster of proven internationalists who will surround the neophyte was diligently worked over: Powell, Cheney, Zoellick, Rice are names which, if this wholly ambiguous result stands, will nonetheless mark themselves decisively on US foreign policy. The weight of global reality, we're assured, will oblige Washington to maintain the same complex presence at the head of the world order that it has done for decades. As candidates, Jimmy Carter promised to pull troops out of South Korea and Bill Clinton denounced the butchers of Beijing, but it wasn't long before they got real.  Such reassurances will continue to be copious once the election is decided. They disguise, though, the likely affinity between Congress and White House in a world view that has few roots in inter nationalism. The voices speaking for that attitude, already diminished in Washington, will be significantly fewer. Perhaps the most optimistic way to put it is that there will be a reinterpretation of America's role in the world, conducted in a unilateralist spirit. The more pessimistic take is to recall the Republican platform's scoffing reference to there being no limit to "candidate Gore's new agenda for America as global social worker".  Three strands have survived the dodge-and-weave of the campaign and remain salient Bush foreign policy positions. First, he believes in more defence spending, but for an army that does not fight. Colin Powell, his presumed secretary of state, is no help here. Powell was first architect of the doctrine that the prospect of a single body bag was a veto on any form of US military intervention. The anachronistic notion that armies are needed to defend national territory, against enemies nobody can identify, has had its day in Europe, where hostile neighbours are potentially close at hand. Yet in Republican America, run by a cold war family and its retainers, the alternative notion of military power as a flexible arm of foreign policy will be hard to sell. European leaders, exponents of this modern realism, face conflict with their ally.  Second, Bush and his people are obsessed by national missile defence. He repeated with casual frequency his commitment to build it. Again, experience may provide reasons for realism to prevail over macho doctrine. Technology and diplomacy will have their say. But again, a regime unversed in internationalism, buoyed by a passion to renounce the ineffectual excursions Clinton made into the field, will not be primarily concerned with what the allies think.  Third, Bush's definition of the American interest, insofar as it has emerged, leaves out a great deal. It fails to address many modern crises. Maybe, again, it's hard to be sure of this as a long-term position. But Republican senators who pay more attention than Bush to foreign affairs are not known for their commitment to multilateral institutions. They've shown little interest in the Aids calamity now striking beyond Africa in Asia and Russia, and still less in the implications of global warming. A modern internationalism must start from an interest in engagement and dialogue with countries of many kinds. If the UN is to face another four years of American cheapness and neglect, how does that advance the US strategic interest? If world poverty is also outside the definition, what does America have to say about terrorism and drug-running that are connected to it?  The election campaign avoided all these issues. As Jim Hoagland wrote in the Washington Post, neither Bush nor Gore "put forward compelling cases for their management of history's greatest accumulation of power by one nation". Both were timid and unspecific about every hard problem. And Clinton has been no Metternich, or Truman. Gore has a vision of the world that engages with reality, as well as a coherent position on the environment which Clinton largely suppressed. But that looks as though it's done for. Bush, president-all-but-elect, has nothing, except a powerful instinct to reinforce the prejudices of those titans he'll find on the Hill when he reaches the detested city of Washington, DC.   Breaking news and detailed back-ground on the race for the White House on the Guardian network at www. guardianunlimited.co.uk/uselection