Once upon a time, politics was easy. Two rules governed almost every move. First, the choice could be defined as left versus right, and allegiances arranged themselves accordingly. In the 1951 British election, when 83% turned out to vote, 97% of them voted Labour or Conservative. Second, economic competence, as proved or disproved in the previous few years, had a correlation with the next election result. There seemed to be a direct trade-off between votes and jobs. Democracies rewarded leaders who supplied high growth, low inflation and reduced unemployment. Neither rule any longer holds. Allegiance has lost the glue of heavy doctrinal disagreement. Politicians no longer refer to themselves, or the other side, as left or right (though it was startling to read in Peter Mandelson's important Morrison lecture last week a straight-faced reference to "what Tony Blair calls One Nation socialism" - a phrase not recently heard, I think, from Mr Blair). Simultaneously, economic success no longer guarantees anything. Look at Al Gore. He inherits the longest run of economic prosperity on every count - jobs, growth, stock market - America has known, but may today become the most shocking loser in American history.  So America is replacing old paradigms. A sound economy is the basis not for endorsing present office-holders but flirting with their enemies. Instead of competence, the people dabble with dignity, respect, leadership and similar abstractions layered with moral coating. For Mr Blair, a Gore defeat will be worrying not because it signals, other than to exuberant rightist pattern-makers, the fall of the centre-left, but because it shows how unreliable the rewards can be for that old elusive goal, a solid economic record. Should Blair, also, be seeking an alternative appeal? Facing his own crisis, in the form of fuel protests, will he do so?  In this de-racinated environment, nobody can be sure how big the crisis will be. A number of epithets fit the electorate that has evolved from the tribal, committed body of half-a-century ago. How about cynical, disbelieving, fickle, grasping, materialistic, self-centred, loose, indifferent? Perhaps it can't be relied on to identify the higher good, as against instant advantage. More engaged and less moralistic than the US electorate, it may be regarded as no less frightening. There's a temptation to search as desperately as Al Gore and George W Bush for the tricksy embraces that will win it over.  This is not only unnecessary. It would also be dangerous. For one thing, Britain is at a different point in the electoral cycle, year four not year eight of a government the voters might feel free to get bored with, and casually throw out despite unprecedented economic prosperity. More important, it's by no means clear that in the end the British electorate want governments to be as irresolute as they are themselves. The old anchors have gone, but two new rules are cardinal in Blair's present situation.   First, the government can't credibly amend its commitment to long-term economic stability. It paid a heavy political price for declaring this ambition from the start, and running public spending on a tight rein in its first two years. That's why health and transport, and now environmental protection, still show painful evidence of under-spending, more than three years in. The justification for that would be destroyed by a panicky pre-election blow-out.  In his speech to the CBI yesterday, Gordon Brown rammed home the long-termist message. Many chancellors have spouted it before him. Nigel Lawson thought his tax-cutting 1988 budget laid the base for a long-term transformation of the economy; instead it contained the seed of the boom-and-bust that persisted into the 1990s. Mr Brown is making a believable virtue of the stability which is the goal he clings to. His prudent, sonorous, Scottish presence at the Treasury personifies the very reverse of fickleness. It's the essential precondition of survival for the governing party Labour has become. In place of left-right dialectic, he says, we offer a massive determination not to yield to short-term pressures. It's what - sometimes to our cost, and some times, as with pensions, by inhuman negligence we must correct - we are about.  Second, the government needs to be in charge of politics. The lures the other way are devious and spectacularly dishonest. Watching the next bout of fuel protest gather, one sees newspapers apparently more united against it than they were last time, and a Conservative leadership mouthing its refusal to support direct action. But the words have weaselly accompaniments. We sympathise with the hauliers' predicament, says the Mail, we must understand their pain. By implication, their case is serious. Likewise, Conservative PR hacks like Lord Bell note the body of opinion which, according to a Sunday poll, would support further haulier blockades. Affecting merely clinical interest, on Breakfast with Frost, he can barely conceal a foaming excitement at the prospect.   From a party viewpoint he may be right. The Tories look with keenest anticipation on the possible breakdown of Britain. But this only makes clearer the course the government must take. People expect it, above all else, to keep the country running. The lures must be resisted. So must the threats and the bogus ridicule. Of the many false arguments made in defence of the hauliers, the most corrupt is the claim that, if trouble now happens, ministers are to blame for taking measures to anticipate it. That such a travesty can be seriously touted in the same leader columns that two months ago were chiding   ministers for their lack of readiness shows how political this dispute has become. If Blair wins this one, they're saying, he's got the election cold. Let us therefore do our best to see he doesn't.  The public, however, takes a more complex attitude. It long ago lost the habit of political allegiance. It can still tell pollsters, before the damage starts, that it supports direct action in favour of lower fuel duties. But in the end it wants governments to govern. In its wisdom, it knows that this is how things must be, and also, even more plainly, that the alternative government now on offer is a non-starter. It is ready to channel short-termism, lower petrol prices, into temporary protest, but long-termism - its preference for future government - into the resumption of support for Labour, as was shown very clearly in opinion polls taken soon after the September calamities were over.  To underpin this, Labour needs no quick fixes. Calling the government out of touch is another bogus crack. What would be out of touch would be to slide into submission to violent protest. The old anchors may have gone, but the demand for a government that does not drift from strategy and conviction has not. If anything, Labour ministers have been short of that quality. The fuel issue obliges them to reaffirm it. They're right to make their economic choice, and right to prepare their political defence, pending proof from the voters, at the democratic moment, that it's what they want.