In baseball, unlike politics, Americans know where they stand. The baseball World Series, which this year reduces "world" to the city of New York, engages every New Yorker with an intensity Al Gore and George W Bush can never match. Ideally the climactic contest would be between west and east coasts, Seattle Mariners v New York Mets. But the Mets v the Yankees is good enough. Baseball is war by other means even at one o'clock in the morning, when I watched the first game stretch into the 12th inning with 55,000 fans at Yankee Stadium screaming and roaring as though morning would never come. Baseball is also the only team game ever invented that has no time limit. There can never be a tie. It goes on until there's a zero-sum result - unlike the election, which must end on November 7 and could produce any one of eight results. Gore could be president, with an all-Republican Congress, an all-Democrat Congress, a Congress split between Democratic House and Republican Senate, or just possibly vice versa. Bush faces the same permutations. Though some outcomes are more likely than others, none can be ruled out. Entering its own final stretch, the contest is too close to call. It's also, however, as unlike war as politics can ever be. Whole armies have not engaged. To the combatants it is everything. But many voters confess to the bewildered paralysis of people who think it doesn't matter.   It began as a battle that did matter. Gore's convention speech promised a stark left-right election. There are still traces of that, in some clear differences over social security spending and tax cuts. While one man denounces big government, the other promises active government. But the blurring is intense. Bush, after all, would have to come to Washington and abandon his puerile pretence that the infamous city can be written out of the script. Gore is now insisting he wouldn't appoint a single extra federal employee. The centre beckons, and the politics of maximum inoffensiveness in search of elusive voters who can't yet persuade themselves the journey to the polling-booth is worth making.  Trivia, therefore, reigns. This is less a political battle than a beauty contest. Who has the cuter smile? Which looks you more warmly in the eye? Which is the more  likeable ? Never mind the competence, let alone the healthcare details - who would you rather have at the barbecue cook-out? Because from likeability comes  trust , does it not? And from trust, the reassurance that this guy will do the right thing, whatever that might be. The verdict on the three Gore-Bush debates was that  because Gore was superior in every sense, he had lost them, and maybe the election too.  Why have things come to this? Three groups collude to produce it. First, the electorate, and its crisis of contentment. For many tens of millions of Americans, including the majority of the 50% likely to vote, there are no agonising existential choices. They think they don't have to confront anything serious that public men can do much about. They are having a good time. Smiles and body-language are attractions they can therefore indulge. Why not give the other side a chance? There can't be much to lose.  Second, the candidates themselves, two dynastic dilutees. The juice is running out of the line. Gore is the son of a father who was a political hero of his time, a Tennessee senator of convictions, about Vietnam especially, which he would not surrender. Bush is the son of a president who was schooled for the highest office as well as any man who held it. Both current incumbents of the names are, by comparison, cyphers: calculating, unheroic, uninspired and, in Bush's case, the empty vessel into which Big Oil and the National Rifle Association have poured enough to guarantee they hold the public interest to ransom if they get the right result.  Third, there are people like me, the commentators in thrall to the reality they see, amplifiers of this trivia, submitters to a zeitgeist they can't escape, compulsive expounders of the thesis that smiles matter, hauteur is deplorable, earnestness an anachronism, policy competence a burden. They may not like this. They compare it with better days, like Nixon/Kennedy or even Carter/Reagan. But they become part of the static that legitimises it. Because every poll says that likeable matters most, every writer has to say that George W Bush is proving an extraordinarily strong candidate for president and commander-in-chief of the US.  The big loser from this tendency is, of course, Al Gore. He doesn't meet the new tests of showbiz politics, yet has so far failed to wrest the election back to the agendas that once counted for everything. This will mark an astounding historic record, if Gore loses. There will never have been a failure like it.  Having been party to creating the contentment, Gore is unable to own it. The economic triumphs of Bill Clinton become an albatross round his neck. The test that used to be decisive - are most Americans better off after eight years of the incumbent party? - no longer figures. It is not only the times that have imposed this degeneration. It is the candidate, who has not imposed the terms of political trade he inherited, and has thus fortified the delusion that the result matters less than the outcome of the World Series.   Whichever of the eight results happens in two weeks' time, it will matter hugely. If Bush becomes president, however close the call, America will have voted for change. That's how it will be seen. A new era will begin to get its name. After Clinton, Bush. It may come down to only a couple of precincts in Chicago, the ones they always said Kennedy stole to beat Nixon, but the name on the trophy will be definitive.  It will bring a lot of consequences. Not just a style and a name and a fearsome collection of interest-groups awaiting their reward for the costliest campaign in history, but, actually, an ideology which, at the edge, favours the rich over the poor, the gunmen over the unarmed, the law of the jungle over the laws of men, and a supreme court that will make such biases come to pass. In foreign affairs, as I wrote on Tuesday, the change of trajectory is set to be much sharper.  Can America, sleepwalking agreeably towards this, be made to care? In a tight race, for the remains of an apolitical electorate, much can still happen to change a few minds. In the land of trivia, the most trivial error could swing it. Bush is more capable than Gore of saying something stupid that makes fickle minds think again about the guy around the barbecue. Nothing, though, will match the ball game, to which I will tonight repair for a glimpse of the old testosterone.