Debating is supposed to be something the British are good at. Our apparent verbal facility, combined with much practice put in at university, produces politicians so talented in the art of argument that Americans, in particular, can only gawp at their brilliance. This is presumably the myth that lies behind the success of prime minister's question time as an upmarket soap opera on coast-to-coast cable television. How long can it survive the fact that real debate is virtually dead as a British political performance? Along with oratory, debate is drowning in a sea of soundbites. At election time, debates between the aspiring leaders take place in Australia and Canada, in Germany, New Zealand, Holland, Sweden and other advanced democracies. But never in Britain. The final presidential debate between George Bush and Al Gore, which finished in the early hours yesterday morning, proved that this form of encounter is now the only one that gives the voters the chance to make a proper reckoning. It has become vastly better than any other. For 90 minutes, interested viewers were relieved of the politics of insults, of gobbets, of crude commercials, of tiny squirts of lies, which are the currency that prevails where such debates do not take place. Instead, the candidates spread themselves in front of us, discussed complex problems, developed reasoned arguments and exposed, for the third and perhaps defining time, the very different personalities they would bring to the most influential job in the world.  The occasion was not without artifice. Each man had spent hours training in the ring with their handlers. But by the time of this debate, after the feints and falsities of the first two, each seemed reduced, or refined, to an essence that could not be disguised. Gore was informed, passionate, combative, making an insistent case for what government could do. Bush was human, anxious, brief-laden, and determined to excoriate Washington at every turn. They civilly loathe each other. While both gave their own versions of the truth about health, education, national security and the rest, the rules of challenge and response produced a dialogue that could at times almost be termed Socratic.  In Britain, land of debate, this has never been allowed. Originally the resistance of politicians grew out of their disdain for television: until 1959, elections were not reported by TV at all. But there were no leader debates for the next 40 years because successive leaders didn't want them. Sometimes they got close. Invariably, though, the strongest placed candidate has ducked away, or else both the big ones have sheltered behind pretended concern about what to do with the Liberal Democrat.  But it is now so obvious that televised debate surpasses any other mode of voter education that these objections must be seen for what they are: ruses which put supposed party advantage far above the public interest. Politicians worry about voters' mistrust of their trade, and alienation from the process. Well, here's a device that can remake the connections and perhaps rebuild some trust.  It would, admittedly, be riding with the punch of television. Instead of bleating about the rise of TV and the decline of parliament, Mr Blair, Mr Hague and Mr Kennedy would be surrendering to the power of the medium that enables them to speak direct - and some parliamentary traditionalists do not like that. To most people, however, the chance to hear from leaders in a more challenging forum than a party political broadcast matters more than, say, the identity of the new Speaker now scrambling to succeed Betty Boothroyd.  Some aspects of the Gore-Bush debates could not be replicated here. America is so vast that even the vice-president is not well known. The debates were a journey of discovery for many Americans who are not part of a national conversation, and have only the smallest idea how George W Bush has governed Texas. To millions of their viewers these were new men, coming out of Clinton's shadow, jousting to make a mark. Britain, given the intensity of its party battle and the centralisation of its small-island politics, would more likely be putting on exhibition leaders about whom the public think they know quite enough already. There could be no displays like Bush's astonishing insouciance about the executions he approved, or Gore's hauteur in face of an upstart governor. British politics holds few surprises, except when road hauliers go into battle.  But the style of the American debates supplies a rule book. Each took place in a hall full of voters, though only in the last were they allowed to ask the questions. The moderator, Jim Lehrer, was always a crucial figure, holding the stopwatch and keeping the candidates to the point; there are any number of British TV anchors who could do the same job, assuming they were able to master their commercial rivalries. The most valuable contribution to both the temper of debate and its reception by viewers was the ban on applause or interruptions of any kind by the studio audience.  This last detail, so foreign to the stoked-up adversarialism of British television, was vital. But the truth is that there are many variants. Debates can be held with or without a panel of journalists, with or without controlled agendas, with the leaders roaming the studio floor or else tethered to a rostrum. The Hansard Society, just before the 1997 election, put forward a complicated format under which the leaders would have spent precise time-slots questioning each other, which strikes me as likely to prove too stilted. Rounding up a representative sample of the electorate, and imposing on it rules of courtesy as well as the job of asking the questions, would be the key preliminary to any debates that had a decent chance of bringing politics back into the realm of voters' real lives.  The Hansard Society, standing aside from both broadcasters and politicians, would be well-placed to organise such occasions, filling the role of the independent Commission on Presidential Debates which set the rules for Gore-Bush. The prior condition, however, is a change of attitude by parties and leaders. At present Hague says he wants debates, Blair is grandly stalling, and each is preparing to take cover behind the problem of Kennedy. If that excuse prevails, it will be yet further proof of bad faith on the part of the political class. It is perfectly possible to organise three-sided debates, with suitably calibrated exposure for the minor party, as long as the will is there.  Now that all other forms of discourse - the pre-spun speech, the empty photo-op, the contrived point-scoring, the ghosted article - are discredited, the extended debate, indispensable meat of Victorian politics, once again becomes irreplaceable.