When August began, the American election looked as though it would be about Clinton's trousers. But the month changed everything. Watching it unfold, I saw most parts of Bill Clinton, his inimitable charisma as well as his porous apparel, receding daily from the public mind. The election will be about the future not the past. It's the most important election in the world. It may also turn out to be the best election in the world, restoring stark left-right argument to the politics of a western democracy for the first time since the 80s. At the start, it seemed possible that the voters were getting ready to withdraw from Al Gore, the Democratic candidate for president, the forgiveness they'd offered Clinton for the Monica calamity. During that humiliation, the public withheld the loathing which many politicians and commentators, including this one, thought would empty Clinton's remaining two years of all authority. We were wrong. But George W Bush promised Americans he would restore "dignity and respect" to the White House. It was the insistent coded mantra he offered the Republican convention. For two weeks, with Gore 12 points behind in the polls, it seemed to be working.  This would have been perverse. Was Gore to be trapped between Clinton's incorrigible frailties, on which the people took delayed revenge, and his populistic brilliance, of which the vice   president, a leaden speaker and earnest policy-wonk, is in regrettably short supply? The laid-back Bush, reformed alcoholic with distant rumours of cocaine lying unrebutted on the table, had the family connections, the new-leaf repentance, the pleasing manner and the apparent experience stemming from one of the weakest governorships in the US, to take advantage of the personality contest the election might easily become.  But already it is different. The personalities will continue to matter, and the body-language is finely watched. Gore hired a ballet dancer to coach him in platform movement. Significant polling gains are attributed to the most lubricious kiss any politician ever gave his wife, uncoached, on a public platform. It's also true that both candidates know their battle is for the centre, both the political and, as it happens, the geographical, the eastern-central and middle-western states. The most startling development as August waned, though, was the clarifying of their differences.  The man responsible for this is Al Gore. He needed to change the subject, away from Clinton's aura and Bush's contentless agenda, and did so by the un-American activity of turning sharply to the left. I don't want to exaggerate this. Gore is still locked into funding from corporate America, still mute on inequality, and well outflanked by Ralph Nader running as an independent candidate. But Bush is much more uncomfortable with a turn of events that is forcing him to be specific.   "Dignity and respect" have almost ceased to matter, as the details of his "compassionate conservatism" begin to be ranged against a Gore programme that shows more confidence than Clinton's ever did in the traditional Democrat constituency.   Central to Bush's programme is a massive tax cut of $1.3 trillion, geared without discrimination in favour of the rich. Gore promises less than half that, mainly with subsidies to middle-class (working-class is outside the US political vocabulary) families. A projected budget surplus of $4.6 trillion over 10 years would be used by Gore mainly to cut the debt, by Bush mainly to cut taxes and start privatising social security. But Gore would spend $400bn on health care - insurance for the low-paid, and free drugs for the elderly - Bush a quarter of that. Gore favours a huge federal spend on education: $115bn over the decade, a 50% rise in an area traditionally left to states and localities. Bush, while making education his social priority, wants to rearrange school structures rather than spend anything like that kind of money.  Whoever wins, Congress will have the final say in all   this. But other differences speak as clearly for a philosophical divide. Bush and Gore would engage with the public and the Senate from starting points quite distant from each other. The most blatant contrast is over environmental protection, where Gore's commitment is as lengthy and knowledgeable as Bush's is Texas-brutish towards any measure making life harder for business, and damn the consequences for global warming. Myriad crucial choices display the same cleavage of attitude. Three seem especially noteworthy. Over gun control, national missile defence and abortion rights, the American voter has to choose between leaders who are absolutists on none of them, but whose preferred biases are heavily divergent.  Gore's predicament, in other words, has turned this into an issue-based campaign. He had to do it this way. It conformed to his own wonkish nature, and played to his strengths as a serious politician who has built national experience over 30 years. More pressingly, it was the only escape-route from the trivialities that suited Bush better. It has forced Bush into the open, requiring the sort of performance in which he has so far failed to shine.  How, exactly, the issues turn out to be argued is another matter. There's more money available for this year's campaign than for any in recorded history, and most of it will be spent on 30-second TV and radio commercials. That's the idiom that will blanket the airwaves with increasing frenzy for the next   two months. America is not a predominantly political country. There is no conversation that could be called national. Many people will have little background against which to measure the roaring assaults. Reduced to three sentences, the case for a trillion dollar tax cut may be all too easily misunderstood. We're not talking Socratic dialogue here. Personal viciousness will also be heating up. It's perfectly suited to the insidious soundbite. The pretence that the other guy is sincere, a ritual bow this August to focus-group disgust at "divisiveness", will soon explode.  But those are commonplace developments: louder and richer than ever, but the usual currency of American politics. What is not usual is a disagreement that can be called ideological. That has not been so common, to put it mildly, in American as in European postwar politics. In this contest it is more explicit than in the last German, French or British elections - though William Hague is doing his best to ensure that next year's choice will be clear enough. What Gore, with the aid of Bush, is doing is to challenge some of the assumptions which persuaded Clinton that the only way he could win and govern was by leading his party from the right. This is making for an epic contest, to be decided as usual by money and organisation, but introducing the US in a new role that puts Europe to shame: leader of a political argument that really matters.