Unilateralism can cut both ways. George W Bush, president presumptive, proposes to do something good with it. He said on Tuesday that the US should make big reductions in its nuclear arsenal, if necessary unilaterally. It didn't matter what Russia did or didn't do alongside. This was a striking novelty from the Republican right. But it was the sweetener for a parallel assertion that would work to opposite effect, which also says that Russia doesn't matter. Come what may, Dubya insists, the US must build its infamous national missile defence system, NMD, to which Russia, not to mention China, or for that matter all of Europe, are rootedly opposed. There's a further sweetener. Europe and Israel, Bush said with a sweep of rhetoric, would be protected as well. It would be an allied matter. Japan could be under cover too. All God's children. This is meant to deflect the widespread affront that Clinton's embryonic version of NMD has given the allies. Bush proposes multilateral benefits. But he doesn't address arguments that persuade sane people this is an insane scheme. Nationalism, not globalism, may be pushing the US towards a misbegotten 21st century destiny. As Europe's custodian of the special relationship, Tony Blair will soon be facing a special challenge to his powers of persuasion, and his courage to dissent.  Clinton has been quite slow to push NMD forward. The reasons are hard even for pre-  election Democrats to overlook. The technical capacity of the system - one bullet guaranteed to hit another, with no forewarning of its firing, at a closing speed of 10,000mph - is unproven. Star Wars worked only in the movies. So far one test failed, another half-succeeded, a third, serially postponed, is due at the end of July. On this single test hangs Clinton's possible decision, guided entirely by electoral thoughts on behalf of Al Gore, to approve NMD deployment. There are reputable scientists who believe the technical reliability of NMD will never, repeat never, be sufficient to justify the costs.  The costs come in two parts. The financial projection, at $60bn, is so immense as to raise serious issues about better means of national, let alone global, defence. Could there not be more potent bangs for the buck? But the diplo-strategic cost is greater still. Seen from Moscow, and indeed from London, NMD bids to be deeply destabilising of the delicate existing architecture of nuclear deterrence. Merely by deciding to deploy - even if the technical capabilities of the system are as fanciful as many serious people believe - Washington will play a dangerous game with the peace of the world.  This is the hazard posed by W, or, if you prefer, his novelty. He suggests not only that peace will be better protected against a host of potentially missile-wielding new enemies (North Korea, Iran, Iraq), but that the old enemy can be ignored. The cold war is finished, and with it the thinking that defined Russia as the threat and Soviet-American treaties as the bulwark of peace.Russia, he says along with Richard Perle, is finished. So the 1972 anti-ballistic missile treaty should be no impediment to NMD. A meticulous article in the new issue of Survival, the journal of the Institute for Strategic Studies, exposes both the illegality and the probable diplomatic aftermath of busting the ABM treaty. But Dubya, backed by Henry Kissinger, Colin Powell and the rest of the old Reagan-Bush galere, is moving on from that tired analysis into a brave new world where the former treaty partner can be dictated to by the American hegemon.  This doctrine, the product of ideological triumph and political opportunism, underrates Russian pride and fear alike. Russia's deepest sense of security remains dependent on nuclear deterrence. It would perceive this as being imperilled by an NMD system that could one day, as Vladimir Putin must reckon, be thickened to black out the Urals as well as North Korea, and thus weaken the premise at the heart of the deterrent deal: each side's be lief in its vulnerability to a strike from the other side. Even Zbigniew Brzezinski, no dove he, attacks NMD for the false assumptions its defenders make about Russia, in the name of converting the US into "an internationally gated community", building exclusive protection against threats that derive a lot from paranoia.  To defend himself against that charge Bush now says he wants to include all allies under the umbrella. This notion doesn't appear to have been any more deeply thought out than the wider implications of NMD itself. It is of a piece with the casual opportunism which, in the context of the presidential election, leaves a great and complex issue vulnerable to many transient pressures. Maybe, whoever gets to the White House in November, a few reality-checks, of the technology, the finance and threats, will test NMD to destruction. But it would be unwise to count on this, in America's present mood of self-centred anxiety and vast budgetary optimism.  The allies, therefore, must continue to express their puzzlement and scepticism. The first Nato discussion of NMD, at the foreign ministers' meeting in Florence yesterday, rightly maintained that tone. Britain, the most faithful ally, has a particular responsibility. While certain not to criticise NMD in public, Blair sees a British role as mediator between the White House and his new special friend, Mr Putin. Clinton's coming visit to Moscow is very unlikely to secure the crowning deal he wants, for   Russian compliance in a modest NMD. With a future president, Blair sees himself as perfectly placed to get the parties round a table to make a sensible arrangement: the typical British middle-man, hoping to tame Bush (or Gore) and at the same time keep them sweet.  Something tougher is needed. Here is a project born of US domestic politics, with help from the military-industrial complex, assisted by congressional merchants of pork-barrel, pushed along by analysts who have lost their sense of proportion in face of the theoretical possibility that the land-mass of the US could be attacked. Serious risk-assessment is overwhelmed by game-players gripped by enchanting hypotheses about a North Korea mad enough to launch a putative missile against California or - the lure offered by a recent Pentagon visitor to Whitehall - Iran to do the same to London. Disruptive though it will be to 20th century alliances, the lures must be resisted.  To Europe, the billions don't matter much. The dollars are America's business. But global stability counts for everything. Washington is being drawn to disturb it radically, underrating the consequences with an insouciance that is a measure of US difficulty these days in maintaining an international perspective. If NMD should divide the alliance, that would be regrettable. But Europe should not quail before explaining to America that it will.