The Brits are good at getting into other countries fast. Defence chiefs are proud of how they moved 800 men to Sierra Leone quicker, they think, than any other country could have done. It was an object lesson in the rapid deployment that is intended to be one of our 21st-century specialities and requires, as a natural precondition, the burial of any parliamentary debate, let alone national agonising, beforehand. Ten days ago this British talent was displayed to smooth effect. What remains to be seen is whether we are as good at getting out as getting in. It is a critical test for the doctrine of dutiful interventionism Tony Blair enunciated during the Kosovo war. The duty to stay could easily come to seem as pressing as the duty to enter. We can see where duty starts, but where does it end? As long as we get out clean, the absence of debate doesn't matter much. Unlike Americans, the British, people as well as soldiers, are ready for action. Acquiescence in its possibly painful consequences is in the bones of a military nation. Up to a point, we probably don't mind about the absence of perfect clarity either. The mission that began as a rescue exercise for Europeans (overwhelmingly British) who wanted to leave is plainly being stretched further, to bring aid and comfort to the UN peacekeepers. Ministers dodge around that, and prevaricate when asked to be precise. But people understand that war is messy and, within limits, are   probably less fastidious than harrumphing editorialists who complain about mission creep.  Thus far, they have been justified. Only a doctrinaire non-interventionist could complain about the rescue operation. History, in fact, supports something rather bigger. The place is, after all, our legacy. In certain circumstances, as France periodically shows in Chad and Britain in Zimbabwe, special post- imperial duties attach themselves to the former European power. It therefore fell to a British contingent, supported by a British flotilla accidentally in the vicinity, to help out in a Sierra Leone crisis we had botched once before and now have a chance to make more sense of. Still no worries. A job needed doing, and our boys could be swiftly on hand for professional work.  Politics now begins to intrude a little. In Whitehall, people talk less about the politics of disaster if a British cohort gets cornered by drug-crazed rebel gunmen, than about the politics of weakness, with an election looming. The need for Labour Britain not to appear wet and wimpish plays a part in the discussion about how and when to come home. This could yet deform the government's answer to the question Sir Charles Guthrie, chief of the defence staff, immediately put to it on return from his African reconnaissance: what next?  After the first rescue, the British contingent has been helpful in Freetown. It calmed things down. The presence of crack British   paras intimidates all and sundry. We've now seen that if the rebel militias attack them they will shoot to kill, ranging beyond the airport whose security is supposed to be their limiting preoccupation. Still OK, surely. And still in line with the Blair Kosovo doctrine of intervention for a moral cause as long as there is a realistic chance of doing permanent good. Under a proactive chief, Brigadier Richards, and wearing its own badges, the regiment seems to have taken over unofficial command, instructing, training, cajoling, helicoptering the UN blue berets towards being a more effective peace force.   Now comes the real political test, which is, quite simply, will we have the nerve to leave? The pressure not to will be great. For Sierra Leone confronts the UN with the greatest crisis in its recent history. Intended to be 11,000-strong, the force there is the largest UN peacekeeping army in the world. Yet it is pathetically failing. It has become hostage - 350 are literally hostages - to the armed gangs of rebel forces who are destabilising the regime it should be defending. Its mandate was clear enough, and extraneous security council complications, such as China and Russia applied in Kosovo, are absent. If this massive UN presence is incapable of sustaining a peace, against a disorderly and largely untrained rabble, one must ask what future there can ever be for the entire principle of humanitarian peacekeeping intervention by the UN.  Some people argue that peacekeeping should stop anyway. Michael Ignatieff, a passionate upholder of international morality, wrote this week in the New York Times that the UN system has reached the end of the road. The neutrality on which it rests is no longer valid, he says. In the post-cold war era, the major disputes, Sierra Leone among them, are between plain good and evil, a dichotomy the UN declines adequately to recognise even as its troops watch Rwandan civilians being hacked to death (1994), or permit the massacre of thousands of civilians by Bosnian Serbs at Srebrenica (1995). A new kind of world order hoves into view, in which the security council authorises combat warriors to deploy against obvious regional barbarians, such as the Revolutionary United Front who are maiming and slaughtering the innocent in Sierra Leone.  This counsel of despair is unlikely to find favour. It begs too many awkward questions about where the lines of evil are drawn, and what sort of warriors might be recruited to fight a foreign war. To stave it off, UN voices will ask the British to stay in Sierra Leone and help the force there turn   itself round. The Brits could no doubt achieve a lot, with their superior training and experience. It will be tempting to listen to the case. The moral force of this, after all, will remain. A government that has forsworn the normal rules of national self-interest in judging when to make its forces internationally available - as Blairite Britain, unlike the US, has done - is vulnerable to persuasion that its duty isn't finished. The horrors will go on. The case for an ongoing presence as part of the UN force itself for however long it takes can be powerfully made.  It needs to be firmly resisted. The pocket generals at the Foreign Office and the fervent moralist in Downing Street need alike to restrain themselves. There is a clear limit to what Britain can or should do. Rather effectively, edging beyond the first stated purpose, we are doing it. This could yet become a modest case-study in focused interventionism, provided it acknowledges that a deeply imperfect situation has to be left behind. The struggle must be resumed at a political level to make the UN, especially the security council, more honest: not making promises it cannot keep, not committing to operations its members decline to man, not watching its moral authority drain away. The paras can't be a proxy for that kind of desperately needed renovation. I can't believe their political bosses will contemplate anything other than orderly withdrawal, mission sort-of accomplished.  <B>Useful links</B>  <BR>  <BR><BR>