John McCain is a popular politician. Around 20% of Americans say they would still like the maverick senator to be president. His endorsement of George W Bush draws Bush closer to the threshold of the White House. It was supplied through gritted teeth, to a man whose competence and priorities McCain eviscerated during the primaries. But it came this week, and with it the prospect of an ugly lurch in Anglo-Saxon politics which not enough Europeans seem to understand. Living, pace William Hague, with contests that rotate around what is roughly decipherable as the centre, we need to be clear that if Bush defeats Al Gore, there will no longer be business as usual. Dubya, as he is known in Texas, is a cunning politician. Even his enemies admit that. As governor, though with powers that are weaker than those of any other in the union, he has been good at acquiring friends and boxing clever. He straddles the ground between party moderates and the religious right who, as his biographers say, "get more sermons than blood, sweat or policy out of Bush", and yet still support him.  Installed as the Republican presidential candidate, he gives the shrewd impression of backing towards the other side, paying his dues to centrists with the promise of a health programme and some serious attention to education. The right, who detest all these things, are putting up with them because they are   insatiably hungry to win the presidency. A deep-dyed anti-abortion rightist like Phyllis Schlafly, veteran of the cause since Barry Goldwater captured the party 35 years ago, says that even a pro-choice vice-president wouldn't stop her voting for Dubya.  So far so political. But this doesn't make Bush a plastic cypher. His record and mentality need to be better known. Ronald Reagan seems by comparison like a genial old boy of moderate disposition who didn't quite know what he was doing. Bush would bring to the presidency a set of biases that are brilliantly chronicled, Texas-style, by Molly Ivins and Lou Dubose, in a mischievous book called Shrub, which manages to be brief and thorough, humorous and devastating, scornful and deadly serious, and deserves to be more widely available than from Random House ($19.95). Three themes emerge from Dubya's political biography.  The first concerns his personal limitations, of character and public competence. He made his money by parlaying investment from friends of his father, then vice-president and Reagan's presumptive successor, in oil businesses that they excused him for failing to make pay. He lost $2m of other people's money but somehow left with $840m in his own pocket. An entrepreneurial coup, you might say, but scarcely the stuff of substantive achievement. As governor he maintained the pattern, showing little serious interest in policy detail, while maintaining heavy rightist attitudes.  As an alternative to Clinton, Bush seems to embody a tenth of the natural intelligence, and not obviously more of the famous "integrity" which McCain and the right pretend he will bring back to the White House. Insider share-dealing, documented by Ivins and Dubose, made Bush millions more than Clinton could ever have got out of Whitewater. He cleared a cool $15m after investing in the Texas Rangers baseball club, built almost entirely at taxpayers' expense.  Second comes his adoration for the corporate world. His two-term governorship has been an exercise in incessant mutual support between Texas business and Texas politics. He received hundreds of thousands of campaign dollars from oil companies that got tax breaks, and corporate interests whose main priority was so-called "tort reform", a rearrangement of the law that makes it virtually impossible for consumers or employees to sue them. Raising money is the apogee of Bush's political skills, and opposition to financial giving-limits the fiercest of his obsessions. The case for campaign finance reform has begun to inch forward, but Bush preaches a regime that would formalise politics as an activity for rich men only.  His policy priorities are arranged accordingly. Environmental controls, especially, are anathema. In water quality and air quality, Texas has the worst record of any big state. Laws about toxic emissions, like membership of regulatory bodies, have been dictated by industry lobbyists. The agenda that failed to pass in Washington at the height of Newt Gingrich's supremacy is law in Texas. This is not a man driven unwillingly to keep political clients sweet, but one who would bring to the White House the most explicit anti-environment prejudices any president has ever had.  Third, his concern for society at large is tightly confined by his greater concern for those who have succeeded. It is sometimes tempting to regard British politics, Tony Blair's included, as having abandoned a preferential option for the poor, in favour of tax advantages for the aspirational. But that's nothing. In Bush's Texas, the governor fought for property tax breaks while denying children elementary healthcare. For most of his time, the welfare allowance for a woman and two children was $188 a  month , recently raised to a princely $201.  As governor, Dubya hasn't had a foreign policy. The advisers assembled round him in this field range between the hard-line sensible and the ideologically rampant, who would tear up the anti- ballistic missile treaty without a second glance, and encourage their neophyte master on a new and uncertain trajectory of American nationalism. His internationalist father comes from another era. The shallowness of W's own approach to the world was exposed when he pulled out of a European tour that was meant to show off his credentials this spring to the peer-group of leaders he expects shortly to join. The advisers decided they couldn't risk it. A single unexpected question from one of those beastly European journalists might expose him as a fool.  The imminence of his presidency is an alarming prospect. Seldom has a candidate's trimming to the centre seemed so unconvincing, softly though he talks and amiable though he looks and pedigreed though he is. The trouble is that the name is what he started with, and it has never been improved by his works. The name brought the money, and the money may bring the job. Devoid of a vote, we're accustomed to saying, especially in the post-cold war world, that American elections don't matter much. But the final legacy of Clinton's folly may be upon us.Desperate to exorcise him, and burning for vengeance, Republicans will pay any price to elect a man without qualities, save deep pockets and an empty smile - and a set of prejudices that will seriously upset the world.