When Tony Blair met Vladimir Putin yesterday, he said he would raise the subject of Moscow's atrocities in Chechnya. There's no reason to doubt that he did so, but equally no reason to suppose he had the slightest effect. He blew his powder at their first meeting in St Petersburg. In the full read-out of that wide-ranging conversation which London immediately supplied to Washington, what most struck the Americans was Putin's unyielding severity on Chechnya. It was harsher than they expected. The Russian replied to Blair's expressions of disapproval with brutal indifference. This gives Mr Blair's protestations about his meeting yesterday an aura of empty piety. The words will have been spoken, but then the leaders moved on to other business. No doubt this was done with civility. Mr Putin studies his interlocutors with the care of a trained agent to touch the right buttons. When he first met Madeleine Albright, he broke the ice by talking about Munich. To the French foreign minister, Hubert Vedrine, he dwelt on Europe. James Wolfensohn, head of the World Bank, was favoured with a humouring of his love of classical music. So one may be sure the Third Way was batted between interpreters at the Downing Street lunch.  For that is what Mr Blair likes to talk about, irrespective of who is listening. Dialogue, in all and any circumstances, has become the hallmark of his foreign policy. Far from being a leader   especially confined within the limits of what is supposed to be "ethical", he is ruthlessly dismissive of such fine points of propriety. Moral protest, such as Putin generated in Whitehall and elsewhere, will cut no ice. This contrast between the theory and practice of Blair presents a startling spectacle.  He's a fervent believer in his powers of persuasion. That's how he has conducted his European policy for three years. He's entranced by talk, and the spirit of this, after Britain's years of silence and/or aggression in EU councils and committees, is reciprocated. There's hardly a leader in the Union with whom he is not best friends, a trait which, a Foreign Office man once told me, had, in the innocent beginning, problems as well as virtues. Such was the pleasure and admiration Blair's early meetings produced that he would return from Europe convinced he had surmounted all the tiresome old problems. Everyone, it seemed, agreed with him. His success in dialogue made, perhaps makes, him believe that anything is possible.  He can't seriously imagine Chechnya is amenable to the same treatment. But the education of Mr Putin to the meaning of economic reform is more plausible. Engagement, for Blair, turns out to be in all circumstances preferable to ostracism. The concrete gains for Britain may be hard to detect. The suggestion that British business might get a head-start in the reformed Russian economy is as dubious in its   premise as its conclusion: the economy has yet to be reformed, and business's success or failure against German and American competitors has never had much to do with sweet-talking politicians.  But for Britain to be first into Putin's Moscow is the kind of vacuous coup diplomats dream of. It also plays to the leader's ambition to be out in front. With the Queen enlisted to give tea to the butcher of Chechnya, we learn how far Mr Blair will go to establish priorities that are quite different from those with which he apparently began.  Under any other leader, this would be striking enough. Moscow is in breach of elementary international protocols. Putin contemptuously humiliated the UN human rights commissioner, Mary Robinson, refusing to acknowledge that she had any locus in Chechnya. The Council of Europe, to which Russia was admitted in hope of tying Russian freedoms to the standards of an international charter, takes such a serious view of the Chechnyan brutalities that her membership may soon be suspended.  Ignoring these signals, riding rough over their implications, could not normally be done with impunity. Even a morally uncluttered head of government - Chirac, say, or even Clinton - would experience embarrassment trying to clarify why he was prepared to welcome the leader who had so affronted international opinion. For Putin, let's be clear, is the winner here. Putative British contracts, or special Blairite third-way instruction, count for little beside the royal respectability the new Russian has been accorded without making a single concession to the legal order his country signed up to. This is what, by the canons of proper behaviour, needs to be explained away.  Blair, however, has another problem as well. He was going to be a different sort of leader, standing for something new in the grammar of foreign policy, an ethical dimension. He raised expectations. These have been betrayed many times over. Whether in Sierra Leone or Iraq or Indonesia, they look like a sick joke. The phrase, in fact, can now be seen as the most foolish platform from which any new government has ever launched itself into the international arena. But it stands in the record. It has not been glossed, still less repudiated, by ministers. It remains in the mind, as the benchmark by which these ministers said they would be judged.  This is what makes the Blair-Putin alliance so arresting. Having once talked about ethics, which neither Margaret Thatcher nor John   Major ever did, Blair shows how irrelevant they are. He is wholly pragmatic, ruthlessly focused, hard-as-nails committed to the supreme relevance of his own persuasive role. The outrage expressed by many sincere people against this premature welcoming of Putin into the embrace of the western powers meets Blair's own passionate unconcern.  There is a case for getting on with Putin. He looks likely to be in power for some time. He may have a mandate for reform which brings legal order to a chaotic economic regime. Under him, Russia will be engaged in reassembling its presence on the world scene. By coming to London, he opens himself to western influence. On nuclear disarmament, he has an inescapable role. Britain, in this respect, has taken the chance to play her part as a proxy for Washington, which will even now have gobbled up a complete transcript of the London conversations.  What's more compelling is the ease with which Blair dumped his pretensions in order to achieve this. The case for sticks not carrots, against the perpetrator of Chechnyan barbarities, goes unheard, just as it did with Jiang Zemin, and might, in the right circumstances, with Saddam Hussein. Instead we get a lot of stuff about men of the same generation who are able to understand each other. New men. New bonds. Special chemistry. This has its possibilities. But ethics? Schmethics. A hard man is sucking up to a harder one, as Bismarck might have said.