This month, two new men set out on their quest to rule their world. They are extraordinarily uncharted characters. The only certain thing about them is that their form is unpredictable. Vladimir Putin and George W Bush have that in common. Though they may be the pairing we must live with for the next few years, their international performance is as unfashioned in their own minds as it is in ours. Against that miasmic background, Al Gore shines out as a beacon of global experience. It now looks more possible than it did at Christmas that he may be the next president. But the looming Putin-Bush duopoly invites us to make an anxious reconnaissance around the perimeter of the unknown. Mr Putin has risen from total obscurity to a 30% lead over his nearest rival in the contest to be Russia's second president, on 26 March. He spent most of his life in junior and unglamorous KGB work, before becoming a city administrator in St Petersburg and then, very briefly, head of the FSB, the KGB's successor as the domestic security agency. That is all. An American official who saw him last summer, when Putin was in that job, said recently he would have been crazy to predict Putin would become prime minister, and certifiable to say he'd be president. Yet that is what, after Boris Yeltsin's  coup-de-theatre exit last December 31, he will soon become.  There are some encouraging signs. Putin will be the first Russian leader since Lenin to speak a foreign language. He    did KGB work in the German provinces for a few years, and told David Frost on Sunday that he had twice visited the US. This points to slightly more spacious horizons than Gorbachev or Yeltsin. Since he became acting president, he has received numerous foreign ministers from the west, reflecting the fact that he plainly does not see Russia in the old way as an autarkic society and knows it must engage with the global economy. This weekend, Tony Blair is invited as the first foreign leader to visit: an interesting signal. Blair is not the leader of Europe, but he's the strongest leader  in Europe, who Putin presumably thinks can tell him about reform.  So the burgeoning industry in Putin studies, hard at work in foreign offices everywhere, has concluded it will be good to do business with a Russian leader who is neither drunk nor (perhaps) corrupt. Putin's reputation so far gives him the benefit of the doubt on that account, though it remains to be seen which of the thieving oil-to-aluminum plutocrats who have drained Russia of billions of dollars claims his close acquaintance.  On the other hand, he is the war candidate. He wouldn't have the slightest chance of being president but for Chechnya, and has pursued the conflict there with a vote-winning brutality that is the primitive equivalent of a chancellor's giveaway budget. Everything is electoral, without necessarily being democratic. The best informed view is that, having been elected, Putin will set about   more serious economic reform than Yeltsin, with help from a variety of mad American economists, ever got off the ground, but will be an unreliable custodian of the people's liberties. The revived police state will coexist, at best, with the beginnings of an honest market economy.  Within this mix, Russia's front to the world will have to become stronger. Moscow craves respect, which is partly why Chechnya is being crucified to the last rebel body. The contradictory message emerges of a man who, on the one hand, murmurs to Frost about Russia possibly joining Nato (though the line was subsequently spun away) and, on the other, openly reaffirms the possibility of a nuclear response to a non-nuclear crisis. According to the Economist, Putin toasted Stalin at a recent banquet, and speaks fondly of Yuri Andropov, his Soviet predecessor as KGB-chief-turned-political-boss. If he was an Austrian, Mr Blair would not be flying to schmooze with him at the opera.  Facing Mr Putin could soon be a different breed of ing&eacute;nu. Unlike the Russian, George W Bush was born and reared to rule. He has be longed to the governing class from the beginning. His pedigree is far superior. But his approach to the world is that of the rank amateur, whose experience may be even narrower than the other guy's.  He makes little secret of his ignorance of foreign affairs, and the occasions of his unscripted interventions on the subject have produced a fair amount of embarrassment. Being tricked into showing he didn't know the names of obscure foreign leaders made him the victim of a poor TV stunt. But what should we make of this, from the Iowa caucus campaign? "When I was coming up," he said, "with what was a dangerous world, we knew exactly who the they were. It was us versus them, and it was clear who the them were. Today, we are not so sure who the they are, but we know they're there."  Behind the syntactical bumbling, this paean of regret for the enemy-strewn simplicities of the old order could soon be ringing through the White House. Behind the free-range nostalgia are cohorts of advisers who, when they write the words, usually prevent Bush from talking gibberish. The empty man has some capable people around him, alongside the mega-rich favour-seekers who have bought him the nomination. But the advisers all come with toughened-up cold war credentials from the Reagan and Bush-pere years, and take a harsher view of China and Russia than presently prevails in Washington, not to mention an unreservedly bullish attitude to national missile defence.   Insofar as one can make sense of it, the Bush view of the world in which he may become the most powerful man is very awkwardly poised. Part of it seems to favour some American withdrawal. The candidate himself has talked, in his Texas home state, about a foreign policy that paid more attention to "the neighbourhood", meaning Mexico and the rest of Latin America. His leading adviser said she thought that in Kosovo "it may be necessary for the US to have fewer troops or no troops at all". But there is another trajectory, towards sharper-edged security involvements, with several advisers advocating outright withdrawal from the 1972 anti-ballistic missile treaty.  Across the range of foreign policy, in short, the president-presumptive himself offers little reliable compass-guidance. He's the epitome of a modern American politician who expends more energy defending hand-guns and overseeing state executions than addressing the unmatched power and responsibility that have accrued to his country. If he wins, he will be starting a dialogue with someone groping with equal immaturity, and perhaps the same distracted indifference, to shape internationalism in the new era: for each, surely his most vital task. The prospect is more disturbing than it is creatively exciting. Bill Clinton may not been much of a role model in global diplomacy either. But with Al Gore, there would at least be one man at the table who knew the shape of it.