Jack Straw's timing could have had more sensitivity to Chilean politics. He might have waited to announce his decision to let General Pinochet go home until after the weekend elections. By raising a dormant issue now, he risks reintroducing the general into a domestic political argument that had mostly forgotten him. But the medical plight of this rotting old tyrant has extracted from Mr Straw a judgment that, while undoubtedly convenient for the British government, is also correct. It was right that Pinochet was arrested, and an act of reverberant justice that the Spanish magistrate who started all this should have been so determined to bring him to trial for the unspeakable crimes he supervised in the 1970s. Anyone whose family was touched by the tortures and murders that were part of the Chilean state machine in those days will feel cheated if Pinochet goes home untried.  They would like him to suffer, even unto death, a mite of the hard fate he inflicted on thousands of Chilean citizens. They don't see why the Spanish case should not be heard to completion, and their feelings at his reprieve are totally understandable. There could hardly be a greater contrast, in moral quality, between the protests of these wronged Chileans and the hypocritical special pleading on Pinochet's behalf by the gang of British rightists, from Lady Thatcher to Lord Lamont, who see in him a heroic role model for conservatives everywhere.  But Pinochet, the doctors say, would be incapable of following his own trial, and Mr Straw has drawn the right, pragmatic conclusion. Pinochet is a discredited figure in Chile. In the election campaign, even the right-wing candidate has failed to line up behind him. Only a coterie of the retired military still worship at the shrine. What could change all that would be death on foreign soil, supplying the general with an aura of martyrdom, giving him a heroic afterlife he will now, with luck, be deprived of.   H e returns home with few of the accoutrements of heroism. He will, after all, have been officially declared ga-ga. Such a figure may remain an object of pity, but hardly an icon of power. He will slink away from foreign internment, after the humiliation of all that has happened to him, a broken man. Better this than the spectacle of an aged prisoner, feeble in mind and body, being hurried towards death by a Spanish court.  The home secretary's decision brings the right end to a thoroughly satisfactory episode. The arrest brought to world prominence a shocking history that many people, including governments such as the British   which were happy to treat with Pinochet as an arms-purchaser, had conveniently forgotten. It brought out from under their stones politicians who were prepared to justify what Pinochet did, with arguments that were revealing in their brazen indifference to human decency: an instructive sight for all to witness.  Next, arrest kept the suspect in captivity, subjecting him to an extended withdrawal of freedom that it was a pleasure to witness, however slight the inconvenience caused to him compared with the brutal interventions he made in other people's lives. The galere of  enrages who came to share his ordeal and rail against it somehow only added to the rightness of what was happening.  Finally, he made a deathless contribution not only to British but international law. If Pinochet had not been arraigned, the House of Lords would not have had the opportunity to rule that former heads of state can no longer claim immunity from prosecution under international   conventions. This was a historic piece of law-making, underwritten by no fewer than nine law lords, which fundamentally extends the reach of international law into domestic courts and, as such, will help to reinforce that concept in courts far beyond these islands.  That might have happened anyway, in some other case of a torturer who strayed into a foreign land where he thought the establishment would make him safe. God knows, there are enough of them about. But it fell to General Pinochet to cause the mark to be made. He will be the forbear of others like him, now likely to think twice before imagining they can rely on amnesty in any place with an honest legal system.  This new legality is inextinguishable. Mr Straw does not wipe it out by sending the untried criminal home. No doubt he saves himself some trouble; and the Spanish government will be even more relieved. These are not edifying considerations. If the general had been in proper health, it would have been good to see the legal process to its end. Pinochet's last years of ruin offered only modest retribution. But since he is a wreck, let comfort be drawn from the immortal service he most unwillingly did: help, via the judges, make the civilised world better protected against people like himself.