The visit of Jiang Zemin shows what British politicians think about their capacity to influence other people's human rights. This has a very low place on their agenda. The British state has made startling efforts to marginalise and, if possible, silence any sign of protest. Trade, ministers think, follows the kow-tow. They may be right. They have smarmed up to the Chinese leader, and relegated objectors behind high barricades, in a way that brings Chinese habits to Britain rather more zealously than it teaches the meaning of British liberty to the butchers of Tibet. This is the political approach. It could be called intensely unprincipled, or perhaps severely practical. Jiang exists: he will not change: avoid his displeasure: keep him sweet: hope to raid his bag of gold. Any objection must remain strictly private. Except that it's hard to imagine Mr Blair privately lecturing, or even chiding, a leader who has made his hyper-sensitivity to such messages clear enough. Since the whole charade is designed to improve relations, why upset them with a futile gesture which, in any case, nobody can verify was ever made?  Ethically based interference in the affairs of foreign countries, especially big ones, is, in other words, hard if not impossible for ministers. If the Blair era has made an ethical mark, it is by the work of judges not politicians. In the realm of human rights, the biggest British contribution in this period was through the   extraordinary intervention by judges in the life of General Augusto Pinochet. Forget Robin Cook. Hail Nicholas Browne-Wilkinson, Lord of Appeal in Ordinary.  Jiang's untroubled presence here just a year after Pinochet's arrest underlines a jarring contrast. Here are two butchers. One is given the red carpet into Buckingham Palace, the other imprisoned on a golf course. We know the reasons why. One is a living, immunised world leader, the other a derelict ex-tyrant from a country that hardly matters. But the contradiction is ethically challenged, and is not, I think, going to be resolved by the arrest of Jiang Zemin. There is another answer. The case for it, already strong, is redoubled by this unsavoury acting-out of Britain's double standards. The time has come to give it.  The sick old Chilean has served his purpose. The judges did their work, and its consequences will endure. Jack Straw has the power, on humanitarian grounds, to terminate the legal process. Nothing further would be lost if Pinochet was not sent to Spain to face a trial that has become redundant.  First, on the personal level, his reputation is broken. He has been perfectly humiliated. The dictator who ruled his world for a quarter-century was abruptly terminated. The more he complained, the more diminished he became, struggling and sweating under armed guard at Wentworth. He had been seized. He could not believe it. He will never be the same. All   heroism is long gone, whether at home or abroad.  Second, the utter feebleness of the arguments in his favour has been thoroughly exposed. These haven't touched by one whit his manifest guilt as an authoriser of torture and murder. Even his defenders have seldom troubled to deny it.   All they've said is that such barbarities were justified in the name of anti-communism. This has provided the modern public, perhaps unschooled in cold war casuistries, with a rich education in the principles of justice as expounded by the exceptionally unattractive gang of Pinochet apologists in this country. We learned what Margaret Thatcher, Norman Lamont and the Daily Telegraph will tolerate in a dictator, one of whose ancillary activities happened to be, for a time, helping Britain in a little local war.  These are useful clarifications. They are part of an enduring truth, well worth perceiving. But Pinochet's greatest service has been to international law. His case was the pretext for the largest advance towards an international jurisprudence of human rights that has recently   been made anywhere in the world: a rare occasion, in this field, that makes one proud to be British.  Thanks to Pinochet, it is now established law that previous heads of state or government cannot claim immunity from prosecution under international conventions. If the authorisers of torture or political murder venture abroad after retirement, the highest British precedent says that domestic courts have the duty to invoke global standards, solemnly laid down and ratified. In countries with respectable judicial systems, no trusty hiding place remains for the traveller who ever did such terrible things.  This new legality is inextinguishable, whatever now happens to Pinochet. It is his unique contribution, almost making up, it might be said, for the vileness with which his name will always be associated. The fact that the House of Lords was obliged, through the folly of one of its members, to hear the case twice only underpins that outcome, because it put the names of nine judges, rather than merely three, behind it.  Some people will insist that the law should take its course, and that if the general escapes it through the intervention of the British home secretary, the need for due retribution will not be satisfied. It would be surprising if the families of his victims did not feel that way. I argued this myself, during and after the law lords' sitting. It seemed to me essential that there should be no quick political escape from the judicial principles laid down. The solemnity of the process de served recognition, and the man himself no special mercy.  But Pinochet, by many accounts, is closing in on death, an event it would be unfortunate to see happen here or in Spain. After many months, and even years, a Spanish trial might find him guilty on the substance, or innocent on an extra-territorial technicality. Either way his reputation, thanks to this year of genteel but famous incarceration, lies in the grave where it belongs. This may be why the credible rumour circulated in both London and Washington the other day that, had the recent extradition hearing gone in his favour, Madrid would not have appealed the magistrate's judgment. The righteous politics of Pinochet are on the wane.  If brought to closure, this process wouldn't make it easier to stomach the relentless official smootheries that gloss over the crimes of Jiang Zemin. But it would be an answer to the reasonable charge of political hypocrisy. Politicians, after all, never wanted to seize General Pinochet. Ministers of both parties had several chances to do so, when he was coming and going to Britain as Chile's paramount chief arms-purchaser. Even ethical Labour didn't dream of doing so. That was left to the legal not the political process. The judiciary are the heroes of this story, and their work is done. If the politician now made a political decision, he would no longer be undermining it. Just resuming normal service.