The ocean that epitomised the name of Kennedy was the Sea of Tranquillity. Thirty years ago today, the father who made John Kennedy Jr famous took us there. Being swallowed by the waters off Martha's Vineyard was an unbearably poignant way to go. Now the lineal male descendant of the president departs with less than a fanfare. There is grief and there is CNN, but there's a sense also that this is the dying fall of a dynasty whose heroes - the only ones famous for being more than merely famous - have been gone these 30 years. As has Project Apollo, the programme to put man on the moon.  Apollo was very Kennedy, the single most stunning commitment of a very short presidency. In its time, it had to be done. And in that time it was possible for a political leader to be heroic, as Kennedy was, and was allowed to be. He led a gigantic decision, taken with almost uncontested urgency.   What happened to moon exploration in the intervening 30 years is as telling an emblem as any of how completely the world has changed - largely, but not quite all, for the better. There cannot be another dynasty like Kennedy's, until the times require another warrior-king to start one.   Apollo came out of the cold war. The Soviet launch of sputnik, and then of Yuri Gagarin as the first man in space, gave America a terrible shock. A journalistic trophy of which I'm proud is a   White House carbon copy of the memo Kennedy wrote to his vice-president, Lyndon Johnson, on April 20, 1961, acquired when co-authoring a book on the American space programme. It is full of the starkest anxiety.   How can we beat the Soviets, Kennedy asks. That is the test. "By putting a laboratory in space, or by a trip around the moon, or by a rocket to go to the moon and back with a man?... Are we working 24 hours a day on existing programs? If not, why not? Are we making maximum effort? Are we achieving necessary results?" It all boils down to this: "Is there any other space program which promises dramatic results in which we could win?"   Two weeks later, the decision was made to go to the moon. Kennedy's science adviser, Jerome Wiesner, one of the few sceptics anywhere near the top, at least succeeded in getting him never to refer to Apollo as a scientific enterprise.   It was all about the defence, prestige and psychology of America, a country then at the peak of its self-confidence, rudely shocked into near-terminal insecurity. Only such a condition could have produced a budget 10 times larger than the Manhattan Project cost to build the atom bomb.   It was the director of manned space-flight, not a five-star general, who expressed the belief that every American should see the moon programme "as the salvation of our way of life, of everyone's way of life, which the Russians are trying to take away from us". But the generals agreed. So did defence industries, in need of a new rocket programme. So did the great majority of senators and congressmen who held the purse-strings.   When the moon was reached, eight years later, Kennedy was dead, and so was his brother. Assassination, Vietnam, urban riots, burgeoning crime and mounting debt had replaced self-belief as the American leitmotif. The final landing, on July 20, 1969, was a relief from inner national disasters: proof not so much that the US could beat the Soviet Union as redeem itself from its own decline.   Apollo was a staggering feat of technology, management and will, on which the White House, now occupied by Richard Nixon, thought it would build bigger things: defence colonies on the moon, space stations circling moon and earth, a manned journey to Mars before 1990.   This vision did not entirely disappear. On the 20th anniversary of the landing, George Bush talked up a human landing on Mars by 2019, 50 years on from the moon. But these neat symmetries did not resound with the body politic. Unmanned probes have gone to every   planet save Pluto, and there was another launch into earth orbit, sucking dry the anniversary, even in the early hours this morning. But Nasa, the space agency, struggles for funds. Though history may find, a hundred years from now, that pioneering space travel was the 20th century's best remembered feat, at present the project is on hold.   For what Apollo needed was an enemy. Once the enemy was beaten in space, and Kennedy's bold pledge miraculously made good, America lost interest in going further. When the enemy was beaten on the ground, with the collapse of communism, the driving imperative went into exact reverse.   Moscow, instead of being the goad to action, became the collaborator of choice, and now holds a new veto on progress. As prime partner in a $100bn project to operate an earth-orbiting space station, Russia has trouble coming up with the goods. Until she does, America is planning no more space shuttle missions to build it.   This is a beautiful paradox. Such unproductive collaboration is preferable to the cold war. If messy peace means no early rocket to Mars, the poor and starving of the earth will not complain. But space's inability to generate excitement mirrors political leadership's inability to do likewise.   Leaders these days cannot be Kennedyesque. Like Apollo, such figures are born   out of the perceived imminence of some kind of national destruction. No leader would write the simple memo Kennedy wrote Johnson, and mobilise the country behind his answer in a fortnight.   So sceptical are we trained to be, so intrusive of private lives and so concerned not to be deceived, that no leader is permitted the possibility of possessing any heroic qualities whatever. We won't go to Mars not only because we can't afford it, but because focus-group consensualism rather than superior conviction is the only motivation modern leaders allow themselves to claim.   John Kennedy Jr was an ersatz hero. He was a decent guy, by all accounts, who had grace as well as glamour. But he hadn't done very much. Every fame the dynasty enjoys grew from a single source, and nourishes the memory not only of the first begetter but of the time, long-gone, when he bore the hallmarks of the kind of leadership that can no longer be.   Our book about the moon landing was sceptical before its time, a late-60s critique of mistaken priorities, smart-ass journalists exposing ruling-class folly. Rereading it, I think it got a lot of things right. But I find my scepticism now directed more towards leaders afraid to be anything like John F Kennedy.