The fault lies squarely at the top for this bizarre situation. Everyone in the NHS is angry and anxious - doctors, nurses, managers and trade unions. Even the private health sector is steamed up too, and the public is alarmed by sinister hints of NHS privatisation. The longer it drags on without refutation from the top, the more truth there seems to be in it. A series of errors has led to all this. It started with a wrong-headed election strategy: obsessed with beating an already dead foe, Blair exaggerated Labour's plans to use the private health sector, hoping to force the Tories on to the lethal territory of paying for the NHS through private insurance. Then unlucky wrong-spinning of the IPPR's report on public-private health deals fuelled the anxiety. (The IPPR in fact slammed PFIs.) Matters got worse with outrageous boasts by the Independent Healthcare Association that a million NHS operations would be done privately. But instead of rushing to douse this fire, the prime minister lets it burn on. Not because it is true, but because he seems unable to make his lips say: "I love the NHS and all who sail in her". Instead he repeats his own dogmatic mantra: the NHS will suffer "No barriers, no dogma, no vested interests", which in the current climate sounds like a clarion call for privatisation.  For the truth is, seek high and low, there is no plan for much more NHS privatisation. True, PFIs gallop ahead with all their faults and future debts imposed by a dogmatic and imprudent chancellor. But the threats in the air which sent the unions marching into Number 10 for wine and asparagus seemed to suggest a whole new tranche. However, there is only what was written explicitly into the 10-year NHS national plan drawn up and jointly signed by the prime minister with the health unions and professions last year. A concordat with the private sector was part of that, allowing health authorities to buy private operations where the price was right. What has gone wrong since then? It is the fault of a dismal language failure at the top, that springs from a deeper ideology failure. Every time Tony Blair says "reform" is needed (which it always is), everyone now hears coded "privatisation".  So how far does the concordat run? Ask the private sector if they are gearing up to take on major new NHS contracts? Quite the reverse. William Lang, the private health industry's chief analyst, is called in as a consultant to venture capitalists seeking to invest in private health. He says if a company's plans depend on expansion of work from the NHS, he advises investors not to touch it. He doubts it will happen. "I see no sign of it whatsoever".  Here is another example of how the private sector is not expecting much extra NHS business. The chief executive of one of the largest private healthcare companies says the NHS is reneging on promises. The government gave £150m this year for 1,500 new intermediate beds (for convalescents) to ease blocked beds in acute hospitals. Health authorities could either provide the new beds or buy them privately. His company agreed to provide 100, investing in physiotherapists and other new staff. The beds were used over the winter, but all patients were withdrawn in April. As a leader in the private sector, he and fellow chief executives expect very little new custom, because health authorities and primary groups prefer to keep the money and provide their own, except in emergencies.  Will creeping privatisation eat up the health service? Ever since Bevan's first bargain with the doctors, the NHS has been an unsatisfactory hotpotch of private and public anyway. GPs are private businessmen. More than 30% of NHS consultants do a lot of private work, creating a perverse incentive to keep long waiting lists. Nursing homes are almost entirely private - though now teetering in crisis and many closing, with the NHS paying only £2 a hour for 24-hour care of even seriously demented patients. Much mental health has for decades been privately provided. Many large NHS hospitals have lucrative private wards.  Even so, the private sector is very small. Private hospitals only do 100,000 simple operations a year, a flea-bite compared with the 6m NHS operations. They could only expand by purloining battalions of NHS doctors, nurses and managers. But a new key test for giving out contracts includes a provision not to let private providers pilfer and offer back to the NHS its own stolen staff. In any case, the private sector, according to analyst William Lang, already has a lot of spare capacity, under-used for years. There is little sign of the NHS using it, expect as an overspill to hit waiting list targets by buying in extra hip or cataract operations in a crisis. No, he says to would-be investors, don't part with any money until a private operator has a firm NHS contract for major new business - and he does not think they will get them.  The NHS national plan does include 20 new, fast-track surgery units, churning out conveyor-belt operations, some of them built and managed privately. But unlike the use of existing private hospitals, the government has already promised that all the doctors, nurses and support staff will remain NHS employees. What's more, inside the NHS there is increasing pressure for training levies, to make the private sector pay back some of the training costs for staff expensively trained by the state.  At the margins there may be more contracts with the private sector. The public sector unions will snap at the heels of all such deals - eternal vigilance is their job. But for the citizens devoted to the NHS, is there a serious danger of undermining the strong public ethos that makes most (yes, prime minister, we know not all), of its workers so dedicated? In truth, the risk looks small. Meanwhile that remarkable target to reduce average waiting times for all operations to six weeks by 2005 requires a transformation not yet imaginable.  In a couple of weeks (why not sooner?) the prime minister will make a speech designed to ease the fears he has allowed to spread. It needs to be a good speech. He needs to eat unfamiliar humble pie and sing a serenade to the public ethos. That requires a bit of ideology, for look where "no ideological barriers" has got him. Is it too ideological to say the best public service is the noblest ideal? When it works, when people pull together for the common good, it is uplifting, life-enhancing and community creating. The NHS, like schools and local authorities is filled with people of good will. To be sure, as Tony Wright MP wrote on this page yesterday, when it fails, when employee interests turn job security into jobsworth sloth, it can be dire. But we need to hear the prime minister say that the best of the public is always best,  because it is public. Private only fills the gaps where public fails. Otherwise people will continue to fear the worst.