Politicians, like vicars, are inherently funny. What politicians do to get elected, what they duck to avoid trouble is often absurd. They have to say things they do not think and do things they hate. They must curry favour with obnoxious people and button their lip when any sane person would utter a rude riposte. In power they must pretend everything under their aegis is for the best in the best of all possible worlds. In opposition they make themselves equally ridiculous alleging that the nation is always on its knees. What they say in public may bear slender relation to what they think in private - and yet breaking the omerta code is out of the question (on the record). Those who appear human - the Mo Mowlams, Ken Livingstones and Kenneth Clarkes - are mainly just more charming actors with a better knack for apparent sincerity. This does not make politicians villains, just professionals in a very tough trade. But there is no riper material for satirists than the comedy of manners at Westminster. Only turn to Simon Hoggart for each day's delightful ongoing pantomime. Indeed only turn to Number 10's website for some sublime bons mots. Try "The prime minister's Passover message: Wishing you a happy and kosher Passover", signed with a personal flourish. Or maybe a  soup&ccedil;on of the PM's Diwali speech, (surprisingly not airbrushed): "Diwali aur naye saal mubarak - best wishes for a happy Diwali and New Year ... I was very struck, listening just now to Mr Hinduja talking to us, about how these values of common understanding and harmony and peace and working together stretch too across national boundaries..." And so on.  A political comedy, Feelgood by Alistair Beaton, which just opened in the West End, is set inside New Labour's inner sanctum in a hotel room at party conference time. It has the sort of irresistible and inventive funniness that would make even its chief victims, Alastair Campbell or Tony Blair, emit a belly laugh or two. Although peppered with political barbs - the leader "does not break promises, he just erodes them" - the fun resides in a brilliantly made old-fashioned farce where doors bang, people hide in lavatories and everything that can go wrong, does. It is Feydeau set not in the boudoir of a lady of ill repute, but in the conference suite of a party of ill repute, (as all parties always are).  Besides, it is a truth universally acknowledged that any party leading 14 % in the polls and destined for a second resounding victory must be in want of a good kicking. For lack of any effective opposition, who else is to check arrogance and hubris but the professional jesters and ego-deflators? The latest run of Bremner, Bird and Fortune has just come to an end on Channel 4: satire is always cleared off the airwaves well before an election. The two Johns' well-researched dialogues were often devastating in their demolition of fraudulent political reason ing. Bremner is a genius mimic, with some good conceits, such as the CCTV scenes between Blair and Campbell in their office. His Blair has become the Blair of national imagination.  To add to that sense that art and life are sometimes politically inextricable, yesterday the real PM made a big electioneering speech on yob culture that so closely mirrored the final, very funny prime ministerial speech in Feelgood, that the author can hardly have believed his ears. His leader (referred to by his team as DL for Divine Light or Dreadfully Lightweight), ends the play with a conference speech every word of which could come (or maybe did come?) from a real speech, including the rallying cry "The job culture, not the yob culture!" which surely Number 10 would have used yesterday if they'd thought of it. Well, Alistair Beaton is an former speech writer for Gordon Brown, so he knows how the dreadful rhythms of those toe-curling conference set-pieces do more to set the teeth on edge than rouse the rabble.  But cynicism, says the government gravely, is a dangerous modern disease. The press spews it out daily - after all, 70% of newspapers are not so much cynics as sworn enemies. We in the left of centre press are "critical friends", a tricky concept. (After all, friends are for support not criticism.) New Labour smiles wanly at the hailstorm of ever more savage jokes raining down upon them - and they wonder, as all politicians do, why no one loves them. This cynicism is corrosive, they fear. It suggests "They're all the same", and "Nothing works", plus &ccedil;a change, why bother?  In truth, the perpetual harping on about the government as if it were uniquely venal and immoral began to pall a bit by the end of the Bremner run. The programme's grapeshot often went wide, Bremner's skilful impressions masking some pretty thought-free scripts. The perpetual this-government-stinks mode began to whine monotonously. After all, if everything New Labour does is self-serving balderdash designed to hold on to their red boxes and Rovers, then there is no particular pith or punch in attacks on the things they deserve a drubbing for. And why the narrow range? Mark Thomas has delivered very funny body blows against far harder and more interesting targets - Export Credit Guarantees, inheritance tax avoiders, fat cats of all kinds stunned to be challenged in the flesh. There is an intellectual idleness about just popping away at politicians for being opportunistically two-faced, (or three-faced if you count the third way). It is in their job-description to try too hard to please while fail ing to live up to their own high rhetoric. There is not much sleaze in this government, but there is always comic potential in a dissonance between politicians' public and private personae. It is also the fate of progressive governments to disappoint. They never reach Jerusalem, not next year, not ever, but at least it is on the itinerary, while the right only yearns for yesterday.  The government may feel aggrieved about unwarranted popular cynicism, but the question is whether Labour really takes the problem seriously enough. They should peruse the Bremner tapes, go to see Feelgood, inhale the aroma of disappointment and worry harder about very large numbers who may not vote this time. (Why give a huge win to a party bound to win anyway?) It is these voters Tony Blair needs to convince, but attacks on yob culture look cynical. Pushing ahead with the universally condemned tube public-private partnership is incomprehensible: a paean of praise for developing a stronger, better public sector would clear the air. Come clean and start to boast about the redistribution done so far, with a promise of more to come. Voter cynicism is fuelled not only by the nihilism of the press and entertainers having fun - but also by Labour pig-headedness on some totemic issues. Too many people may vote for nothing unless they get something stirring to vote for. Meanwhile, good jokes cost votes.