The pensioners of this country are never going to forget what he did to them!" Michael Portillo bellowed from the dispatch box - and he was absolutely right. Of course he meant the infamous 75p but this was indeed the milestone budget they will remember, the day when pensioner poverty was ended. Pensioners will never fall again below the poverty line, the income of the poorest now pegged in perpetuity to keep up with earnings - a new era from Beveridge's minimalist beginnings. "We are very pleased," said Age Concern, for the new minimum income guarantee of £92.15 is higher even than Age Concern's own estimate of an acceptable level: they only pitched for £90. That represents a 20% real rise between 1997 and 2001. What's more, it is to rise again to £100 (at today's prices) by 2003 - a 32% real rise in just six years. These are the principled increases. The rest are political necessities - that £5 walloped on to the basic pension and the £50 extra winter fuel payment to be paid out right now, on Monday. Those 12m pensioners had better vote Labour after rich and poor alike have cashed in.  You could call this a quick fix, as Michael Portillo did. But it is also a resounding vindication of the government's plan to raise up the poorest.They were getting only £68.80 when labour came in: by next April they will have had a five times bigger increase than if Barbara Castle had had her way and the basic pension was simply   re-linked to earnings. Was it a cheap trick to raise the basic pension as well? It was certainly craftily done by re-badging it a "transitional" payment until 2003 when the new pension credit comes in for all those who have small savings, incomes up to £20,000, the majority of pensioners.  No doubt the prime minister's father-in-law will still boom away about robbing the pensioners and along with Barbara Castle will still not rest in their campaign to restore the earnings link for all, rich and poor alike. But the chancellor has spent £3bn more on these plans than if labour had simply restored the link on day one. At the same time he would have wasted £2bn on giving a bigger basic pension to those who already have incomes over £20,000. Is that socialism? Or is ending pensioner poverty forever more like it? Let's hear no more about it from now on. Labour has achieved more for pensioners than its unambitious manifesto ever pledged - or anyone dared hope. 2001 will be one for the social history books.  All this has utterly trounced the Tories, left them floored and floundering only able to cry by political foul: the chancellor says one thing and does another, which is true. He said he wouldn't raise the basic pension and now he has gone and done it. The miserable Tory promise to take away the winter fuel payment, the Christmas bonus and free TV licence and give it back weekly has just fallen on its face. This is politics as usual -   forget prudence, this is electioneering - but entirely necessary. Poor Portillo was left protesting about pensioners: "None of them are going to understand it".  It seems unlikely that an extra £14 and more in their purse every week will escape their attention. The serious question Age Concern asks, is what about the 500,000 pensioners who don't claim all the benefits they are entitled to? Finding them is essential to finally ending pensioner poverty. A £15m advertising campaign with telephone hot-lines so all form-filling can by done for them over the telephone has elicited 500,000 enquiries and payments to 50,000 already. They have been slow, though, to bring in Age Concern and Help the Aged and fund them to help find the missing claimants, since they are the ones in touch with day centres and pensioner groups on the ground.   B oth yesterday's big payouts to truckers and oldsters were politically necessary - made necessary, it should be remembered, by the chancellor's own actions - a stealth tax too far on fuel and that 75p. He may be a prudent financier, but he has   shown himself a poor politician. Surprising, when you count them up, how many of the government's banana skins have been dropped by Gordon Brown. First and worst was his disastrous over-claiming and treble-counting with his 1998 first comprehensive spending review - promising everything, giving much less and squandering public trust.  Recent polls show that when asked to choose, people wanted the pensioners to cash in more than they wanted fuel cuts. So has Gordon Brown done it? Has he fixed the protest? He has stuffed the hauliers with cash - more than they deserve if the government wanted to show they didn't give way to naked threat. Clever to combine a petrol tax cut for all with a great green gesture by speeding the introduction of more environment-friendly fuel. Clever to give the average family motorist more at the same time. As the protesters fall apart in disarray, anarchic leadership inevitably struggling to maintain unity or legitimacy, Gordon has almost certainly fixed it.  All that prudence and all that dosh too, he seems to have hit the right note. However, his budgets in the past have often turned out to be chinese meals: once the instant impact of his cleverly presented speech is over, a little while later the meal doesn't feel quite as substantial as it seemed at the time. He is a great one for magic rabbits - the £50 extra winter fuel payment was a classic bunny. With a flash of his wand, head teachers get be tween £4,000 and £30,000 to paint a few classrooms. Families earning under £40,000 will get £10 a week for their new children's tax credit. Urban wastelands get incentives for renovation.  But then stand back a moment and consider. He is spending just £2.6bn more in the next year. Could and should it have been more by now, had he slowly and openly raised taxes over the years? He is a curious Midas where everything he touches turns to gold, but he can't spend it. He probably has £15bn in his coffers, but can't use it for fear of inflating the economy. The only way he can spend without interest rates rising is to tax back at the same time, of which he has done relatively little.  The heads of the FTSE 100 companies had an average 20.4% rise this year: couldn't he have windfallen the fat cats a bit? Public expenditure has fallen as a proportion of GDP under Labour. Everywhere you look, the lack of public money marks Britain out as the slum of Europe: schools, health, trains, holes in the road, ugliness and lack of pride in public places. The day the chancellor distributes his largesse always leaves a warm sense of "so much done". Next morning we remember the "so much still to do". The shock of popular support for the petrol tax revolt suggests no more taxing can be done. But it is also a symptom of how little Tony Blair or Gordon Brown have tried to lead opinion on the value of taxation.