Are the chancellor's coffers half full or half empty? That all depends on how you look at it. Optimists who look ahead will find the golden dawn painted out across the sky. Colossal sums are pouring into health and education, into transport and housing. Cascades of coins reach into every crevice, from new nurseries for hard pressed working mothers to the World Service. Year after year for four years ahead, the money rolls out: spend, spend, spend on everything. Gloomier souls may look at it at first through different spectacles. The teachers, doctors and public service managers who have struggled through the austerity years may see this largesse with a rather more jaundiced eye. It was bought with prudence, it is the fruit of prudence, but for them prudence had been squeezed from their bone marrow in those two years that saw the lowest public spending in 35 years. The word prudence had the same threatening ring as John Major's fearful words, "If it isn't hurting it isn't working". It did hurt. The chancellor himself yesterday spoke of the "damage done by decades of under-investment", but the two worst years were his own, when public spending fell to 38.3% of GDP. (In 1976 it was 49.9% - not a fair analogy but telling nonetheless.)  Mindful of this ambivalence, the chancellor wisely spoke in solemn tones. Beyond the odd epithet flung across to the writhing benches opposite, there was no triumphalism. This is not   quite the time for Rejoice! Rejoice! The lesson has been well-learned from the announcement of the last comprehensive spending review in July 1998, which pumped up public expectations that couldn't be delivered. In the midst of the hardest spending years in living memory, people suddenly expected to see signs of miracles everywhere around them. The spending didn't begin until nine months later. Even then, government agencies atrophied by years of cuts were unable to spend it all fast enough. So this time the chancellor spoke few words: he let the figures speak for themselves, which they did eloquently. Less was more.  Again, this money doesn't start until next April, one month before the expected election-day. Hospitals and schools will be spending, but there'll be no magic transformation. No doubt more bad-news figures will continue to trip up the government now and then - crime rising instead of falling, wrestling with the intractable hospital waiting lists and school class sizes. And yet the good signs are all there. Already good auguries abound: if every other programme works as well as the New Deal for the young unemployed, then an array of progressive social triumphs await. The New Deal is the first in a long history of unemployment schemes and projects (YTS, Yops and others) to pay for itself, covering its own costs so far in the numbers taken off benefits and found a job solely through its agency. As a totem, it's a hopeful omen for how well-spent all this money could be.  The mountain still to be climbed was there in last week's official poverty statistics. Some experts doubt anything the government can do will narrow the gap in earnings between richest and poorest, as all across the western world salaries at the top soar away in this boom time. What matters more is whether the government narrows the gap between the bottom and the middle, and they are starting to do that for families with children and for poor pensioners. But to hit the child-poverty abolition target, it will need more and more money from state top-up schemes to be added every year if their real incomes are to increase equally alongside general income rises. It's the most pressing case for a major increase in the minimum wage, pegging it to average earnings. Average incomes have risen 10% since Labour came in: it has taken a huge redistribution of money by the state to make sure the poorest families with children have also seen a rise of between 10% and 12%. Any slackening and many will start to fall back again.  Over there on the benches opposite, trying to look as if they weren't sucking lemons, the Conservatives watched this Midas at work. Which way would they go? Would they trash this as fairy money, spun-gold, not enough to make a difference to the schools and hospitals still looking much the same as ever? It would have been the more convincing route. Out there the public says in every opinion poll that they want more spending and they want results. According to a Mori analysis this week, grumbles about taxes come a very long way behind complaints that after three years, not enough has changed. Far easier in this climate for the Tories and their newspapers to persuade people that these telephone book numbers are all meaningless, it's not enough and most is wasted in bureaucracy and extra social workers.  So the government waited to see which way Portillo would jump. A sigh of satisfaction rippled down the front bench as Portillo opted for the good old position, one which suits both sides of the House so well as they settle back comfortably into their familiar roles. "Tax and spend!" he bellowed, pawing the ground. "Yes!" went the benches opposite, "And proud of it!" Here both sides are happy on their home turf.  At last the Tories are forcing Labour to define itself. Yes it has taxed, and yes it has spent. That is who they are. They have redistributed to the poor and their ambitious targets demand they do much more. Spending well on public services into the far future is what Labour does. Consider 20% more on public transport that will take far longer than this cabinet's political lifetime to show full results. There is a solidity about building trams and railways, a confident assumption that the future will continue to be high spending. Sure Start embodies a vision of a Labour future where babies starting now will mark a new cohort of Labour educational success. The increase in spending on education will be more than double John Major's, 3.8% over the parliament to 2002 compared to his 1.6%. This is now set fair to become the progressive government they have yet to declare themselves wholeheartedly to be.  After a rough summer as chill as the weather, they need to go away and decide who they really are. The Blair memo must mark the lowest ebb of self-doubt, dither and fear, a loss of identity and direction in a tired man in a panic. The Daily Mail is indeed frightening. But the only answer is success. Next year voters will still have to take this government on trust for lack of spectacular public service improvements. That trust can only be built on a clarity of image, a firmness of resolve and a message that abandons the hazy mystifications of the third way. Money talks, and it spoke loudly yesterday, a solid message better far than any words designed to please those who will never be appeased. The dark first two years are now well and truly over. The sun is almost up at last.