Great news for everyone. Stunning news for the NHS. Very good for poor and middling families. Many more children taken out of poverty. Poorer pensioners have done well. Schools have a dollop more with more yet to come. The regions have a billion between them. Even airline passengers, drinkers and drivers are winners. In all the land only smokers have been punished. So rejoice, rejoice. Fine goals and targets, audits of success and generosity were rolled out yesterday. One million poor pensioners are now £20 a week better off in real terms: eat your heart out Barbara Castle, they've never had so big an increase. Only 50,000 people remain long-term unemployed: the New Deal is working. 1.2m children will have been lifted out of poverty this year - and child poverty will be halved by 2010, (abolished 10 years later). Not just working families, but families living on income support are far better off, with an extra £1,500. Half of all pupils will be in higher education in 10 years time. Who could ask for anything more?  Never have the country's finances looked so rosy. The golden figures poured like doubloons from the chancellor's lips. Growth is wonderful and sustained, outdoing its forecast year after year. Unemployment, and therefore the social security budget, is dropping like a stone. Inflation is the lowest in 40 years. A phenomenal surplus of £12bn is bursting the chancellor's pockets. Oh joy!   No one alive has ever lived in such good economic times.  So why doesn't it all feel quite as good as it should? Why isn't this dancing in the streets time? Where's the surge of rekindled May 97 high emotion? Try to feel it again by saying: "Look at all that's been achieved! Would you have guessed so much could be done in under four years?" But no, something is missing. Listening with hope to Gordon Brown the heart does not beat faster. In fact now and again the gorge rises a bit. Ungrateful, or what?  The something missing is a tribal, clannish thing. We want him to talk to us, his people, but he insists on talking to the enemy too. All those familiar Brownisms - prudent, prudent, prudent - somehow fail to charm. Every time he gives something to his own, he gives something to the enemy too. So we get a triumphant reminder that inheritance tax is almost defunct: as the rich avoid it, 96% of the people never pay any. (Hurray for the inheritance principle?) We get a heavy cut in capital gains tax too, down to 10% for business. Terrific. As expected, he pushes on with the 1p cut in income tax. Great. The total tax "burden" (as Labour should not agree to describe it) is staying the same. Britain stays at 39% while far more productive Germany with a far higher standard of living and less inequality, take 49%.  Does it matter? If he can do all these wonderful things for the people and the services that really need it, does it   matter how much tax is taken? It does if taxing more allows even more spending, without raising interest rates. But why tax for taxing's sake? Ideology does not feed poor children, buys no new teachers or nurses, builds no health centres or colleges. The history of ideology in British politics is dismal - think Michael Foot and Margaret Thatcher. And yet this is not the end of history. Politics do still matter. People need to be given a coherent account of what the government is doing and why, who they are for, who against. Parties need to define themselves with rallying cries to their natural supporters. People see very little of what is actually happening but they believe the stories they are told. Why else would an astounding 40% of people tell the Guardian/ICM poll this week that they feel worse off this year than last, when for most of them it simply cannot be true? They've been reading the wrong newspapers instead of reading their pay slips. That is why Gordon Brown's deft and crafty playing to the galleries on both right and left may in the end be self-defeating. It tells no story.  One of the most admirable and likeable things about    New Labour has been its obsession with  what works . Teams of researchers and policy advisers dig out the evidence and plunge into gritty details of how to get people jobs, stop them doing crime or get children to learn. They are serious, compared to the contemptible frivolity of ideological Tory ministers who preferred a flag to wave and the politics of gesture, however perverse the actual result.   B ut the result of Labour's ideology-free politics is a risk of losing contact. Where's the red thread that links a hundred good practical schemes? Where is the signpost, so people don't get lost? There was too little glue in Gordon Brown's speech. Playing both ends against the middle, he risks failing to get the great credit he deserves from his own side. Prudent he may have said, over and over again, yet there was an air of throwing money in every direction in something of a panic - the same panic that made the prime minister promise such monster sums to the NHS on the David Frost show (why on earth there and then?). There's a bung to keep education quiet for a bit and a plethora of fiddly measures designed to keep everyone happy. A few of them are mildly daft - like the government giving more money for every penny donated to charity (remember, that means taxpayers' money going to dogs, Eton and every religion, even Odin worshippers). Presumably that was   an over-reaction to the mad Hague claim that cutting tax means people give more to charity.  The root problem is that the Tories are such a feeble foil. Opposing them is so easy is just doesn't give Labour enough chance to define their own identity. So when the chancellor adroitly mocked the Tory tax-cutting plans, pointing out that 75% of Tory proposed tax cuts would benefit the top 5% of punters, it did not cut much ice, because what the Tories say barely counts. Portillo is laying out a plan to augment health funding with more private provision - a big Tory idea for the next election. This budget didn't just spike his guns, it decommissioned them for once and all. This whacking great NHS increase and the mighty review (oh, not another!) to decide how to spend it will end any debate (for now) on whether a modern democracy can will the ends to pay for a modern health service.  Make no mistake. This is a terrific budget. Almost all of it is very good news. If this kind of growth is sustained it should mean that in a few years public services really will look and feel more like the quality of the rest of our lives. Large numbers of the poor will have had more money and more help than ever before. The question for Labour is how they can take all this good news and sell it, so people believe it. No spin, just the facts, but plain facts need a strong clear vision to make people take them to their hearts.