Thank you, William Hague. At last he has contributed something useful to the bloodless politics of these times. His lecture on the morality of taxation flushed out the government, forcing it to admit that tax has indeed risen since 1997. Once it had been admitted, the government had to justify it - and be proud of it. High time, too. No more stealth taxes, no more slipping large backhanders to the poor while hoping the Daily Mail isn't looking. It means that at last Labour can start to boast about how much money has gone to the pockets of the poor - this government's honourable first spending priority when it came to power, ahead of more popular and visible spending on schools and hospitals. As a piece of elegant sophistry William Hague's speech is a masterpiece of the genre. Its daring humbug takes the breath away - Uriah Heep meets Ebeneezer Scrooge. "High taxes mean less freedom, less responsibility, less community, more dependency, a less elevated human condition," he said. Preposterously, he claimed high taxes stop people spending their money on training, saving, books for children and care for elderly parents. Nothing here about the boom in bars, restaurants, holidays, designer clothes and the whole mighty whoosh of consumerism among Britain's under-taxed high spenders.  The moral tax-cut comes, like many British political ideas, from across the Atlantic where last week I heard George W Bush define "compassionate conservatism" thus: "It is conservative to cut taxes, it is compassionate to give people their money back." It was obvious that Hague would rush to imitate Bush's great anti-tax campaign with its huge bribe to the voters ($2,000 a head minimum, much more for the rich). Hague reiterated his impossible "tax guarantee" pledge to cut the overall burden come what may. Toying with the idea that charity might replace welfare, he claimed that people would give more to charity if they paid less tax - notoriously not the case in the selfish spirit of Thatcher's 80s when giving dropped like a stone. "We will make tax a key battleground of the next election," he promised. "We must show that it is our Conservative low-tax agenda that is not just the basis of a dynamic economy but also the foundation of a moral, compassionate, free and just society."  Into this battleground steps the chancellor on Tuesday. The question this time will not only be "What's in the budget?" but also "What does he want people to think is in his budget?" Politically the message will matter almost as much as the money. It is not just Labour's grumbling heartlands that must be appeased, but the great concerned majority who may uneasily agree with William Hague's (self-defeating) observation that "public services are not getting any better. The NHS is locked in permanent crisis. Police numbers are falling and crime is rising. Our roads are gridlocked". In other words people do make the link between paying higher taxes and getting better services. If they are constantly told that taxes are not going up, they may be inclined to think the government isn't doing enough to mend the devastation in public services left by 20 years of underfunding - and they would be right. They may suspect that if it isn't hurting their own pockets, it probably isn't working. You get what you pay for. So the symbolism of the penny cut in income tax may may perversely work against the chancellor and not for him after all. Now suffering the backwash of his two-year spending freeze, many Labour MPs wonder if it was really necessary to get elected? We shall never know, but the price has been high.  Budgets are not what they were now that treasury getting and spending is separated. Only the July spending review will reveal how much is to be spent over the next three years on all the pressing needs around us. We do know Gordon Brown has a pile of money to spend - some £10bn - without raising any extra tax. Is it enough? There will be a steady increase for schools and hospitals - higher growth than ever before, but not quite a spending revolution. (Can it hit Blair's NHS promise to meet the EU average?) For when it comes to public spending there is no "enough". For example, imagine replacing every dismal, uninviting school with gleaming state-of-the-art buildings filled with unstressed, well-paid, state-of-the-art teachers, enjoyable places not just for children but enticing local people in to use computers, swimming pools, gyms, evening classes, art rooms, cafes and theatres for pleasing leisure. It's not an impossible dream. But only higher taxes could see such a progressive leap in public facilities. So the question is not how far Gordon Brown's existing war chest will go but whether he dare raise tax to the maximum? That is whatever the economy and employment can bear, whatever voters will wear once they see what the money can buy. High taxes well-spent are virtuous, but the case for taxation would have to be made boldly.  It's time to counter the Tory "stealth tax" charge by exposing the "stealth welfare state" of the rich. Start with national insurance where the rich still don't pay their fair share. There is a ceiling which means the low paid pay a higher proportion than top earners. Taking the lid off would bring in another £4.5bn a year. The self-employed pay virtually no national insurance and that includes some of the very highest earners, such as partners in big law and accountancy firms who deem themselves to be self-employed. Taking that away would bring in about £2bn more a year. Inheritance tax is now almost non-existent. It only kicks in on estates worth over £233,000 and   most of the rich hand over their money before they die to avoid death duties. The Fabian tax commission is considering a good inheritance reform that would bring in billions. Restricting the personal allowance to the basic tax rate would bring in another £2bn from top earners. Another £1bn a year can be collected from country land-owners who sell their acres to developers but pay no capital gains tax if they roll over the money to buy more land. The valuable signature of a local planning officer lets them make millions without paying any tax at all. All these are stealthy ways the rich pay too little tax. Does it make them more moral than everyone else?  Taxation is fiscally virtuous because it allows spending without inflating the economy. Taxation is a far better way to   damp down over-heating than by constantly pushing up interest rates, which helps to keep the pound far too high for industry. Taxation is virtuous because when well spent it can buy everyone far more of the things conducive to contentment than they can ever buy from their own pocket. If William Hague is going to run on a "selfishness pays" platform, Labour will have to show how it doesn't. It is not necessarily a moral issue but one of enlightened self-interest. No doubt the chancellor will please many on Tuesday - he always does. But a paean of praise for tax would be a new defining moment for Labour, courtesy of Mr Hague.