The Rebels: How Blair Mislaid His Majority<br />by Philip Cowley<br />320pp, Politico's, &pound;9.99 According to an appendix in The Rebels (a more or less scholarly examination), between 2001 and 2005, the Labour leadership in the House of Commons faced 47 "major rebellions". Major, that is, as defined by Philip Cowley in defence of his thesis that, far from being supine, the modern backbencher is at least as independent-minded and courageous as his predecessors were. The list includes the support given by 19 Labour MPs to a new clause which a Liberal Democrat backbencher hoped to add to the human tissue bill - a subject which, since it possesses moral and religious overtones, would be regarded in the Whips office as exercising the conscience of Honourable Members and therefore not suitable for particularly fierce discipline. But "overdoing it" is Cowley's style. Neither his exuberance nor his obvious self-satisfaction should obscure the basic fact that, if he is right, a number of Labour MPs regularly voted against the party line. They were not always the same. Some were those who are now derisively described as the usual suspects. And Cowley is right to say the strength and effect of voters against the government diminish with their regularity. It was not Jeremy Corbyn who worried Tony Blair by voting against 90 days' detention without trial, it was Nick Raynsford. But since there is a core of regular rebels - always was and always will be - it is reasonable to say that half the rebellions which muster less than a couple of dozen followers are likely to be discounted and ignored as the reflex of constant dissidents. However, the recording and analysis of the degrees of dissatisfaction is clearly attractive to students of government who hold an actuarial view of politics and are, therefore, more interested in numbers than in ideas. But it is the idea - inherent in the conclusion to which The Rebels comes - which is open to question. It is wrong, Cowley argues, to suggest either that the Labour leadership is obsessed with the need to control its MPs or that the MPs themselves behave - in a metaphor to which he takes great exception - like sheep. Damn it all, there have been (Tory) years in which nobody voted against the government at all. The facts are true, but the conclusion is faulty because it does not take account of one feature which distinguished the Blair administration from every other government of the last century. Its policy constantly, and some would say intentionally, went against the grain of the party from which it sprang. Again Cowley is right to say that the threat of rebellions to come and the memories of rebellions past often encourage government to make surreptitious changes to its intention. But again, the extraordinary fact of Blair's record is that, athough so much of what he proposed offended the party, he was rarely persuaded to alter course. The question that history will ask is how did Blair manage to deconstruct the Labour party and rebuild it in his own image - and still, while barely paying lip service to the consultation which Cowley rightly describes as essential to tranquility, have so few rebellions? Blair's own theory is that the Labour party is not what it used to be and that his heart beats in time to its new instinct. A more likely explanation is that highly professional though politically inexperienced MPs were seduced by the triumph that followed 18 years of opposition. Cowley's next book will reveal how long the feeling lasted.