Dear Bill: WF Deedes Reports<br/> by WF Deedes<br/> 432pp, Macmillan, £14.99 According to Bill Deedes - who has "been on both sides of the fence" as cabinet minister and editor - relations between politicians and press should always be "abrasive". If, during his time in the cabinet and during years at the Daily Telegraph, he practised what he now preaches, we can only assume that his abrasion was both elegant and benign. On the evidence of Dear Bill, he is incapable of behaving in any other way. Combined with a self-deprecating humour, those qualities make the memoir a joy to read. At one of the parties to celebrate his 90th birthday, Lord Deedes suggested that his years as a soldier were the only part of his life which he regarded as remotely successful. False or genuine, his modesty was clearly misplaced. But it is obvious from his account of his time in the King's Royal Rifle Corps why he looked back at his four years in the front line with great pride. There is nothing vainglorious about his accounts of battles fought and won - many of his descriptions made more vivid by extracts from letters written home at the time. Duty had to be done and the Germans defeated. By the end of the war he was "indignant at the demand for unconditional surrender" and in deep disagreement with "what seemed an unquenchable thirst for the total destruction of Germany, the innocent as well as the guilty". Even in 1945, chivalry was not quite dead. His riflemen had left him in no doubt that "the shortcomings of the national government" before the war would result in a Labour landslide victory once it was over. Five years after his demobilisation Deedes became the Tory member of parliament for Ashford. He was quickly appointed a junior minister. The chapters of Dear Bill that describe the next three decades of his life are, in effect, a personal history of his time. His explanation of why Harold Macmillan, rather than RA Butler, "emerged" as the successor to Anthony Eden after the shame and failure of the Suez invasion is contained in a single line. But it says all we need to know about Conservative mood and motives. "Macmillan looked like the more reassuring figure and at that point the Tory party were aware that a great deal of public reassurance was needed." Deedes left the government to return to his original trade, where he remained until he became Macmillan's "minister of information". The prime minister's invitation - "Will you return to the sinking ship?" - increased his doubts about the wisdom of rejoining the government. But, as always, duty had to be done. Among his less enviable tasks was the management of relations with the press during what has come to be called "the Profumo scandal". He is charitable about the errant war minister in an old-fashioned sort of way and describes Stephen Ward - the pimp who introduced Profumo to Christine Keeler - as "an osteopath, artist and libertine". It is one of the several examples of archaic language which adds a quaint dignity to Dear Bill. He later describes a constituent whose reputation he fought to rescue as being wrongly accused of "inviting a man to take liberties with her". In 1974 Deedes left the House of Commons to become editor of the Daily Telegraph - or, at least, editor of those parts of the paper which commented on, rather than reported, the news. He is almost invariably extravagant in his praise of those who work for him - including some journalists who were not universally regarded as possessing the "remarkable talent" that he identifies. Yet, somehow - instead of attracting the accusation that he wants to be regarded as an all-round good egg - Deedes gets away with his benevolent hyperbole. His attitude towards Andreas Whittam Smith, Matthew Symons and Stephen Glover, who left the Telegraph to found the Independent, borders on the quixotic. He has no complaints about them jumping ship: "Fleet Street as it was then, and remains now, is a market place. Loyalties have never been deep". And the necessary secrecy in which they operated - resulting in Deedes discovering their intention from a leak to the Financial Times - is accepted with resigned understanding. He regrets only that changes in society prevented the secret from being kept longer: "Confidentiality is a lost virtue." On the evidence of Dear Bill, Deedes retains many of the attitudes of a lost age - the era in which, as a young reporter with the Morning Post, he covered the Italian invasion of Abyssinia in the company of Evelyn Waugh. There were, according to his accounts of that expedition, moments of absurdity that confirmed the suspicion that he was the inspiration for Boot in Scoop, but do not read Dear Bill because of that, or to discover if his relations with Denis Thatcher (which account for the memoir's title) were as bizarre as Private Eye made out. Read it for its style and its compelling content. No better autobiography will be published for a very long time.