Downing Street Diary<br />Bernard Donoughue<br />Cape £25, pp800 The justification never varies. Richard Crossman, Barbara Castle and Tony Benn all insisted that they kept and published diaries not to massage their egos or improve their bank balances but as a contribution to history. Bernard Donoughue, head of Harold Wilson's policy unit between 1974 and 1976, makes the same claim and goes even further. The Prime Minister, he implies, wanted him to tell the story of those turbulent years. Donoughue protests his innocence with the fervour of a man who has the grace to feel guilt. 'Mr Wilson certainly did not actually suggest that I should keep a diary ... he disliked the whole idea of personal revelations about himself and he often made disparaging noises about ministerial colleagues who he knew were keeping diaries ... yet he knew I was by profession a contemporary historian ... it was my view that he was not averse to my preparing a record of his time as Prime Minister.' It is 30 years since Donoughue worked in Downing Street and his diaries would have received more publicity (and sold more copies) had the minor sensations which they describe been revealed earlier. But he postponed publication until some of the old wounds had healed. Now he has reopened them. Entry after entry chronicles the alleged excesses of the Prime Minister's private secretary, Marcia Williams, now Lady Falkender. Wilson, whom the diaries claim she dominated, is portrayed as a man in deep decline. He can no longer be libelled, but it is possible to betray the dead. So the postponement does not absolve Donoughue from answering a basic moral question: can it ever be right to record meetings and conversations which colleagues believed to be confidential and then publish the edited notes in return for money? An attempt to answer that question must be preceded by a declaration of interest. Donoughue's diaries are invariably kind about me. They record the author's several unsuccessful attempts to persuade Wilson to promote me. My preferment was regularly blocked by Ms Williams. Gerald Kaufman told me that during one reshuffle I was about to be elevated but she advanced the case for another minister. 'I know nothing about her,' said Wilson. 'You know she's not Roy Hattersley,' she replied. Perhaps I should be on Donoughue's side. But I am not. I dislike diaries in general. The success of Alan Clark's melange of gossip, self-pity, salacious fantasy and the bits of information picked up secondhand amazed me. But at least they were too trivial to be treacherous. People who considered him a friend may have been embarrassed by his accounts of their louche behaviour. But no real damage was done to political reputations. Clark's 'revelations', like Piers Morgan's Mirror journals, appeal to readers wanting to peep through a metaphorical keyhole at the lives of people they call celebrities. They raise questions of taste, not propriety. On the other hand, Benn's diaries usually deal with issues of importance, at least to the political classes. They have to be taken seriously, even though vanity shines through every page. But Benn's dairies do raise questions about reliability. Until I read his entries for March 1984, I naively assumed that anyone who recorded events each night wrote down what really happened. Benn's diaries suggest otherwise. They record that I made a fool of myself at the opening press conference of the Chesterfield by-election campaign. That, regrettably, is true. Anxious to confound journalists, who I knew would claim that I had little in common with the candidate, Benn, I prepared a list which juxtaposed issues on which we agreed with policies which divided us. In my excitement, I confused the two columns and claimed to support policies which I was known to oppose, and vice versa. Everybody laughed except me. My shame was broadcast on TV news bulletins all day. When Benn's diaries were published, I looked to see how they dealt with my humiliation. I was spared nothing. No complaint about that. But Benn attributed my mistake to a misguided attempt to defend Neil Kinnock. Knowing Benn's opinion of the then Labour leader, I suspect that he wrote what he wished had happened. Yet some entries are breathtakingly honest. Benn, who invented the idea of 'leaving parliament to go into politics', describes an influential conversation with Chesterfield friends who said he would have to fight an undignified campaign to have any chance of reselection as the Labour candidate there. And Barbara Castle reveals how she received news of her removal from the cabinet with a frankness that shows the depth of her pain. There can be no complaints when diarists expose their own secrets. The moral question only arises when they turn Queen's evidence on friends. Personal prejudice is bound to obscure the truth. Donoughue's account of one of the 1974 general election nights, as the Prime Minister leaves his hotel to watch his votes being counted, is, no doubt, exactly what he recalls. 'Just before we left, Marcia went into the bedroom and summoned HW after her. I stood near the door and listened.' She 'demanded' that one of his aides should not be allowed into the count and 'attacked Harold' for giving tickets to Donoughue and another aide. The people's identities do not matter. The language does. Summoned? Demanded? Attacked? Each word is too subjective to be genuine history. No doubt they describe what Donoughue then believed to be true. But despite being a contemporary historian, he, like the rest of us, sees contentious events through the distorting mirror of his own opinions. So do all diarists. Even if they resist the temptation to settle old scores, dismiss all thought of vindication and struggle to be objective, they still produce only a partial account of what happened. And they betray. What is more, they prejudice the business of government. Ministers are not at their best when they fear that every private word will be taken down and used in evidence against them.