TH Green's Theory of Positive Freedom: From Metaphysics to Political Theory<br/>by Ben Wemde<br/>300pp, Imprint Academic, £25 The Labour party has always been short of philosophers and, for most of its lifetime, openly contemptuous of the "ideological speculation" which its continental comrades thought necessary to the pursuit of consistent policies. GDH Cole wrote, with obvious approval, of "socialism so undefined in its doctrinal basis as to make recruits readily among people of different types". It was enough to be "a broad movement on behalf of the bottom dog". That worked well enough when "bottom dogs" made up 30% of the population. Improving their lot was Labour's moral purpose and they were the foundation on which a parliamentary majority could be built. The poor are always with us - but not in the numbers to sustain class politics. Labour needs a theory to live by. Fortunately one philosopher has defined the boundaries which divide social democracy from other political creeds. But for 100 years TH Green (1836-82) has been forgotten or ignored. Ben Wemde's TH Green's Theory of Positive Freedom may be heavy going at times, but it is essential reading for anyone who thinks that the Labour government should do more than pluck individual initiatives out of the air. Even back in 1868, Green was concerned with the "adverse effects" resulting from the lack of adequate philosophy. "The Great Reform bill had enfranchised the town artisans and the lower middle classes." Freedom, defined as "absence of coercion", did not meet the needs of the modern age. Green extended the idea to "a positive power or capacity of doing something". Twenty years later, Bernard Shaw satirised the traditional British view of liberty as the universal right to have tea at the Ritz - for everyone who could afford it. That was a flippant version of Green's view that rights, to make practical sense, had to be accompanied by the  ability to make choices available in a free society. Green, a solemn man, would not have regarded tea at the Ritz as a worthy example of the freedoms he wanted to extend. When he argued that, from time to time, the freedoms of the few might have to be restricted to enhance the freedoms of the many, he took a lofty view of the state's prescriptive powers. "In all cases in which the law prescribes a certain conduct which a conscientious man would have done voluntarily, the true moral agent will look upon the law as a powerful friend." The "conscientious man" - far from objection to "infractions" of his liberty - would actually welcome legislation which required employers to take responsibility for protecting their workmen against industrial injuries. Although, inexplicably, there is no mention of it in The Theory of Positive Freedom, Green also defended Gladstone's Irish Land Act of 1870 which protected tenant farmers against "rack-renting" absentee landlords. There could be no freedom of contract between parties of unequal strength. The state, representing the community, must take positive action to defend the poor and weak. Green's views were largely ignored. In 1955, Isaiah Berlin, in his inaugural lecture as professor of social and political theory at OxfordUniversity, argued that Green was wrong: "If I am prevented by others from doing what I would otherwise do I am unfree", but a blind man is not "unfree" because he cannot see. Following Green's lead, social democrats should argue that blindness, caused by the wilful act or the negligence of the state, is a denial of the "positive freedom" - the right to see - that a civilised state should not tolerate. There was a time when Tony Blair agreed. In October 1997, shortly after becoming prime minister, he wrote to Berlin, taking issue with what the philosopher had said during an interview which was published in Prospect. Surely, he argued, "the determination to go beyond  laissez-faire continues to motivate people today". Moral values, not the market, should determine the positive freedoms we are able to enjoy. Berlin never replied. He was mortally ill. The interview - unknown to the PM - had taken place five years earlier. Who knows, had there been a proper discussion between the politician and philosopher, Blair might have remained an unconscious follower of TH Green.