The Blairs and Their Court by Francis Beckett and David Hencke<br/> 288pp, Aurum, £18.99  <br/>  The definitive biography of Tony Blair will not be published until well into the next decade. We are told, on his own authority, that if he wins the next election he will remain in office for a full parliament. Even then it will take years for genuinely dispassionate observers to make an unbiased assessment of his record. Anything that is written while he remains prime minister is bound to reflect the prejudices of the moment. If you doubt it, read The Blairs and Their Court. Its assault on both his conduct and character is unremitting. Disenchantment and disillusion seep out of every page. There is no attempt to make a balanced judgment.  Much to the authors' credit, they make no attempt either to counterfeit objectivity. The title, the jacket picture and the polemical style in which it is written all proclaim that The Blairs and Their Court is a philippic. The result is, in one sense, hugely entertaining. The narrative zips along at breakneck speed and is laced with the sort of damaging anecdotes that will delight Blair's enemies. But the indictment is too extreme to be convincing. Even Macbeth had redeeming features.   Some readers will argue that, because of his style of government, Blair asks for all he gets. There is no doubt that he sees the political battle in highly personal terms. Any politician who offers his own trustworthiness as a reason why the party he leads should form a government must expect his critics to examine his record as "a pretty straight guy". The picture that emerges from The Blairs and Their Court is of a modern Machiavelli ready to pursue the causes in which he believes by every means at his disposal. If the portrait ended there I, at least, would not complain. But the authors are not satisfied with condemnation of his political methods.   The evil was, apparently, obvious even in Blair's youth. At Fettes he used his notorious charm to persuade the matron to favour him at the expense of other boys. By the end of the book he   has become the reincarnation of Ramsay MacDonald - "vain, handsome, with theatrical talents and idolised by his closest friends". Would that were so. MacDonald deserted the Labour party, leaving the socialist majority to recover and prosper. Blair has abandoned Labour's principles and taken much of the party with him to the soggy centre ground of the "third way".   Instead of an analysis of Blair's beliefs, we are presented with the testimonies of failed ministers who, one by one, recount how the promise of high office was broken. Derek Foster, one time chief whip, was certainly badly treated. So was Chris Smith, the best culture secretary in history. But the others were lucky to enjoy a brief period of glory. Of course they claim that they were badly done by. Sacked ministers always do. But they are a poor stick with which to beat a prime minister.   The sources of the sacked ministers' complaints are embarrassingly obvious. Some of the stories were clearly dictated verbatim. But the provenance of some anecdotes is worse than dubious. The account of Blair's appointment to the front bench, after only a year in the House of Commons, bears very little relationship to what really happened.   And I am simply unwilling to believe that Donald Dewar plotted to replace Neil Kinnock with "his old undergraduate friend and fellow Scottish lawyer, John Smith". Dewar was not the plotting kind. And had he been engaged in any such activity, I would have known about it.   The reference note which legitimised the allegation makes absolutely no sense - according to the authors, the result of some sort of confusion at the publishers. There is, they insist, more than adequate justification for every story they record. Perhaps the sources do exist. But that is not an assurance of accuracy and politicians are inclined to remember to their own advantage.  The Blairs and Their Court suffers from the error which caused the prime minister to claim that Saddam Hussein's WMD could be fired in 45 minutes. It is too easy to believe what you want to believe.   It is equally tempting to select only the facts that justify a long-held prejudice. Blair - recently appointed the opposition's employment spokesman - was faced with the weekend dilemma of whether or not to endorse the European Union's plan to outlaw the closed shop. And I did believe that when he consulted me "he had already made up his mind". I told the authors so myself. But I also reminded them that he was presented with a package deal. Outlawing the closed shop went hand-in-hand with enshrining the right to trade union membership. On that occasion, Blair's behaviour was both right and brave.   However, it was neither the selection of facts nor the uninhibited antagonism which most set my teeth on edge. It is not even the distasteful allegation that Blair's behaviour during "Cheriegate" - the minor scandal concerning the purchase of two student flats in Bristol - would have "killed all the trust in most marriages". My basic objection to The Blairs and Their Court is the way in which the character of its criticism made me feel protective towards the object of its ire. The book is very generous about me. But I shall not lightly forgive the way in which it made me a Blairite for a day.