What Might Have Been<br />by Andrew Roberts <br /> Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson £12.99, pp224 Most authors would rejoice if a book which they had edited was called 'great fun'. But I fear that Andrew Roberts may resist and resent what I intend as a wholly complimentary description of  What Might Have Been. I enjoyed some of the chapters so much that I shouted praise for its frivolous merits at my television set when a young historian - arguing on  Newsnight with my old friend Christopher Andrew - denounced the whole idea of 'alternative history'. Surely, I thought, no one could regard the genre as more than high class entertainment.  Apparently, some people can. Included among them is Andrew Roberts himself. 'What ifs', he tells us in his introduction, 'can play an important role by reminding us that no route is predestined... if we accept that there is no such thing as historical inevitability and nothing is preordained, political lethargy - one of the scourges of our day - should be banished.' Do not even bother to ask why that should be so. Skip the ponderous denunciation of 'Whig and Marxist history' and enjoy what follows.   It would be a very dull reader who did not find delight in Anne Somerset's description of the Armada's successful invasion of England and the cultural revival, led by William Shakespeare, which followed. In his  Henry VII, the king and hero 'browbeats Elizabeth of York into accepting his hand in marriage, immediately after he has arranged for her brothers, the princes in the tower, to be murdered'. Under Spanish rule, his plays become 'one of the glories of the Isabelline age'.   Shakespeare's Tudor sycophancy - much of it based on the otherwise saintly Thomas More's prejudiced history of England - has rarely received such an elegant rebuke. It takes self-confidence, as well as style, to write a straight-faced account of what did not happen as if it were established historical fact. But half of the contributions to  What Might Have Been manage to make their fiction sound like established fact.   Norman Stone describes the consequences of Archduke Ferdinand surviving the Sarajevo assassination attempt. Adam Zamoyski follows Napoleon home, in triumph, from Russia. Simon Sebag Montefiore explains why Stalin, after deserting Moscow in 1941, becomes 'a relatively minor figure in the Soviet pantheon'. It is the 'spoofs' which give especial delight. The contributors who analyse like political commentators plod along.   Sadly Simon Heffer - whose biography of Thomas Carlyle proves that he knows better - is among the plodders. We can only assume that this usually genuine historian was overcome by the nature of the material with   which he was required to deal. A true disciple of Margaret Thatcher must have found hypothesising her death in the Brighton bombing almost too much to bear.   But worse was to follow. Integrity required him to explain why Michael Heseltine - the Great Satan in Thatcherite hagiology - would have been her successor. His triumph would have been the result of a paradox which Heffer does not mention. Heseltine, the darling of Tory Party conferences, would have become Conservative leader because he was away from the Brighton Conference on government business.   Robert Cawley's 'Benedict Arnold Wins the Revolutionary War for Britain' is more concerned with how the colonists might have been defeated than with the consequences of that defeat. John Adamson, instead of describing how 'King Charles I Wins the English Civil War', speculates about what might have happened following his royalist victory in the summer of 1643.    Roberts himself reports Lenin's funeral ('Kamenev and Zinoviev both chose to dwell on past services... rather than his vision of the future') as if he was the Moscow correspondent of the  Daily Telegraph. But he cannot resist the occasional diversion into academic speculation and therefore shatters the illusion.   However those three essays - like a vast majority of What Might Have Been - offer an all too rare combination of enjoyment and education. The only two catastrophes are Conrad Black's 'The Japanese Do Not Attack Pearl Harbour' and David Frum's dramatic fantasy, 'The Chads Fall Off in Florida'.   Frum's playlet, which describes 'the election of President Al Gore', contains dialogue which must make any sensitive reader cringe. How can anybody write, 'Kind of makes you feel bad that we dusted off Sudan's offer to finger him to the CIA'? A similar question might be asked about Black's prose, much of which is innocent of all meaning. Consider, for example, 'The emergence of Japan as a method of American entry into the war was a late development.'   Black and Frum aside, the pleasures contained within  What Might Have Been lull the reader into a wholly uncritical acceptance of the theory on which it is based.   Buy the book and read it for fun, but when you finally close the pages you may be left with the sneaking feeling that you have been conned. The various eventualities, which it compresses into a single view of historical chance, are different sorts of alternatives. Nobody can really believe that if the archduke had received immediate medical attention, after the bullets struck in Sarajevo, the First World War would not have happened.   On the other hand, although European history might well have been changed if Napoleon had won in Russia, surely there is agreement that - unlike the story of the archduke being left to bleed to death - no outcome other than retreat and defeat, was possible. It is not necessary to be a Marxist determinist to believe in the Russian winter.   It is important to remember not only that nothing described in  What Might Have Been happened. Some of the ideas are inconceivable. The rest would not have changed the world, even if the dreams had come true.