The Myth of Decline<br/> by George L Bernstein <br/>816pp, Pimlico, £9.99 What sensible person could disagree with this book's proposition that the decline of Britain is a myth? Of course it has not been all downhill since 1945. So who, exactly, is saying the opposite? George Bernstein quotes, as evidence, Alison Murray's description of England - a "shabby, mangy old lion", so feeble "anyone could tweak [its] tail". But Murray is a character from fiction  - the heroine of Margaret Drabble's The Ice Age.  Drabble herself is no more likely to mourn the passing of empire than I am to join the United Kingdom Independence Party. In fact, The Myth of Decline, although long on historical fact, is short on any sort of analysis. Its very considerable strength is the way in which - often by a bald recital of what ought to be well-known facts - it draws the reader's attention to obvious, but previously disputed, truths.  "By the standards of other western European states (but not of Japan and the United States, whose cultures are entirely different) Britain's welfare state was not excessively generous. If anything it was a bit stingy."  So much both for those Labour sentimentalists who boast that Britain's social services are "the envy of the world", and the Conservatives who claim that our generosity - exceeding our neighbours' - attracts "welfare tourists" from less happy lands. What sounds almost like an excuse for British "stinginess" is an equally important reflection on why the United Kingdom, although doing well, did not do better.  Other countries "did not have Britain's overseas commitments and atomic weapons. So they could more easily afford the welfare state." Bernstein concludes that UK governments could not "have got away with a smaller welfare state". Quite right. But they could have got away with reliance on the American strategic umbrella rather than insisting that Britain possessed what Harold Wilson once called "a so-called independent, so-called nuclear, so-called deterrent".  It is astonishing that Britain - carrying the triple burden of excessive defence expenditure, residual responsibilities of empire and the restraints of sterling as a reserve currency - managed to do as well as it did. There must be something in the water.  The paradox of Bernstein's analysis is made clear by his description of the attitude to world affairs that all the main political parties shared in 1945. There was no admission of decline, even though there was a great deal of resentment that Britain had been forced to liquidate many of its overseas assets to save the free world. But the predominant feeling was pride.  The country that had "stood alone" against aggression regarded itself as almost a superpower. So it accepted superpower obligations and, in consequence, improved its economy and the lives of its people far more slowly than would have been possible had realism broken through.    The Myth of Decline is a straightforward history of 20th-century Britain - although, for some reason that escapes me, both author and publisher are reluctant to admit it. As a proper history book should, it struggles to be objective.  The analysis of "The New Liberalism" - Bernstein's description of Thatcherism - describes the objectives of that theory in the language that its practitioners and proponents might use. "The keys then to Britain's econ-omic revival were several, get government out of the economy and cut the size of the public sector ..."  Bernstein will argue that he is merely reflecting Thatcherite prejudices. The description goes on for too long - and contains too much excitement - to prevent the suspicion that the author felt some sympathy for "individual self-reliance". At least he  accepts that Thatcher's election did not mark a historic turning point in national fortunes. Thatcherism did, however, mark a major shift in the zeitgeist. Bernstein, in a moment of understatement, concludes that "New Labour looked an awful lot like Thatcherism ... its economic prescription accepted that beneficent supremacy of the market ... Government should reduce its role in the economy."  He is right to say that Keynes had gone out of fashion before Mrs Thatcher arrived in Downing Street. At the Labour conference in 1978, Jim Callaghan explicitly refuted demand management as a way of maintaining high employment.  Bernstein's analysis is sufficiently perceptive to stand on its own feet without being propped up by a not altogether convincing theory about a national inferiority complex.  The Bernstein theory of imagined decline embraces reaction against American cultural imperialism and resentment that satellite television has made sport more commercial. Most British citizens have the sense to realise that scientific progress balances advantages with detriments and that global television was bound to change the world for worse as well as better.  Combine new technology with the economics of scale and Murdoch was bound to produce a version of what began in Hollywood. When, many summers ago, I went to see Donald Wolfit in  King Lear, I wore my cricket flannels with my school blazer - hoping I looked like Gene Kelly in  An American in Paris. Our cultures have been confused since Edison recorded sound.  The Bernstein thesis has to be examined in two parts. He is right to say that Britain has not declined, but wrong to suggest that many informed people thought it had. Around those two propositions he has written a wonderfully detailed history book. If the intellectual gimmick helps with sales, that is all to the good.