From Bevan to Blair: 50 Years' Reporting from the Political Front Line <br/>by Geoffrey Goodman <br/>296pp, Pluto Press, £18.99    Blair's Wars <br/>by John Kampfner <br/>384pp, Free Press, £17.99   It is not, I think, only an affection for alliteration which made Geoffrey Goodman call his political memoirs  From Bevan to Blair. Historical symmetry requires Clem Attlee's name to be mentioned in the title, for Bevan was neither prime minister nor party leader. Clearly, Goodman believes he should have been both. I find it incomprehensible that anyone who has read  In Place of Fear , Aneurin Bevan's rambling political testament, should hold that view - especially if they are as perceptive as Goodman. But chronic Bevanism is one fault among the book's many virtues, not the least of which is the author's scrupulous fairness towards his hero's enemies. I doubt if any other memoir by an old Bevanite heaps such praise on Hugh Gaitskell.  Goodman was - indeed still is - a journalist of enormous talent. It is his skill at identifying the important issues, and analysing their causes and results with fearless clarity, that makes  From Bevan to Blair serious - though always readable - history. It took some courage to describe his old friend Michael Foot - the greatest Bevanite of all - as "an improbable figure as potential prime minister". But he should not allow his charitable instinct to delude him even into suspecting that some SDP defectors voted for Foot rather than Healey in the 1980 Labour leadership elections for honourable reasons. They wanted to damage the party they were about to leave. So they helped to make an "improbable figure" leader.   It is the chapters on the Wilson and Callaghan governments that make this required reading for anyone who wants to understand the 60s and 70s. Goodman worked in as well as wrote about those administrations, and therefore writes with great authority about what I find hard to believe ever happened - even though I took part in many of the initiatives, dmarches and debacles that it describes. It is true that I told the CBI that if its members failed to hold down wage claims they would be subject to "penal sanctions". Those were the days when governments thought it right to intervene in the economy, and I was violently attacked for including a chapter called "There Must be Markets" in a book on social democracy. Only a writer of Goodman's quality will be able to convince future generations that Britain once had something called a "statutory prices and incomes policy".   Anxious as I am not to sound obsessed by Goodman's title, I have to point out that his memoir says virtually nothing about the present prime minister. I take it for granted that he does not share the quoted view that "Neil Kinnock and John Smith were an interregnum, awaiting the emergence of a new political phase which many believe to have reached its apotheosis in Tony Blair". An old Bevanite must recognise that Kinnock and Smith struggled to develop a modern version of social democracy. Blair searches for an alternative.   Anyone who doubts that the political landscape changed in 1994 has only to read  Blair's Wars to be convinced that Labour's current leaders have very little in common with their predecessors. It is important not to attribute views to dead heroes - or, in the case of Callaghan and Kinnock, live ones. But it is inconceivable that any previous party leader would have pursued a foreign policy that amounted to marching to war in step with the United States.   Not all Blair's wars were declared at the instigation of America - though it is Iraq for which he will be remembered and excoriated. That was certainly the result of a determination to preserve what he fondly imagined to be a "special relationship" combined with a sad over-estimation of his power to influence the president. But, as John Kampfner rightly points out, the fascinating aspect of all Blair's campaigns was their motivation. He sums it up in one glorious paragraph: "A combination of self-confidence and fear, of Atlanticism, evangelism and Gladstonian idealism, pursued when necessary through murky means. His was a combination of naivety and hubris."   In fact, Gladstone pursued a cautious foreign policy. Blair would neither have withdrawn from the Transvaal after the defeat at Majuba Hill nor left General Gordon to his fate in Khartoum; he would have declared a holy war against the Boers and the Mahdi. But the rest of Kampfner's analysis is beyond dispute. Blair's wars are extraordinary because of their frequency - Iraq in 1998, Kosovo in 1999, then Sierra Leone, Afghanistan and Iraq again. But they are even more astounding because of their motivation. Blair feels he has a mission to save the world.    It would be wrong to suggest that all his foreign-policy initiatives were based on the same messianic compulsion. And Kampfner is scrupulous in pointing out the aspects of his policy that all men and women should applaud. Blair wisely used the opportunity of September 11 2001 to nudge President Bush towards accepting a Palestinian state. And I have no doubt that his intervention in Kosovo was promoted, in part, by reports of the hideous conditions in which thousands of refugees were living.  Blair's Wars does not question the prime minister's integrity. Quite the opposite. It shows that he possesses a surplus of righteous certainty - and a dangerously high estimation of his own powers of persuasion.   If Blair has been a lucky prime minister he has, in part, made his own good fortune by treating politics like a cavalry battle. The best form of defence is the charge. Of course, that tactic results in a lot of troops being slaughtered. With Blair the casualties were metaphorical - hopes, dreams, ideals. But the problem with cavalry charges of every sort - literal as well as figurative - is that their overuse ends in disaster. The moral of both these books is that, for the Labour government, the time has come to settle down.  Roy Hattersley's  A Brand from the Burning: A Life of John Wesley is published by Little, Brown.