A Dog's Life<br /> by Paul Bailey<br /> 192pp, Hamish Hamilton, £15.99  <br />  Paul Bailey's A Dog's Life confirms that a book should not be judged by its cover. Despite the title, the drawings on the jacket and the display of consciously endearing quotations, this very slim volume is not about dogs at all. It is about Paul Bailey. Circe, the cross-bred bitch that he bought on impulse after seeing her in a pet shop window, is a canine come-on, a loss leader in the supermarket of the author's self-indulgence.  After the first mention of Circe   I hoped that she would become Everydog, wandering through life and meeting all sorts of people whose lives were changed by the acquaintance. In fact, much of the book does not concern her at all. There are long descriptions of trips to foreign parts in which the dog - apparently not inoculated against rabies and fitted with the magic chip - cannot take part. So Circe is left at home with a variety of minders, which put me off from the start. Dogs are meant for life, not periodic amusement.   Leaving a dog in the care of one of Bailey's friends is a risky business, for their mortality rate is exceptionally high - a depressing trend for which the reader is pre pared by two deaths on the first page (fortunately, Circe survives to the last chapter). Nevertheless, Bailey continually tells us what happens when she is not there. The chapter in which Vanni, a casual acquaintance, is given custody of Circe while the author takes a week's holiday in Egypt is typical. It begins with 11 lines about the dog and continues with a 17-page account of unattractive people doing inconsequential things.   Bailey subscribes to the "what I did on my holidays" school of literature: "On a second trip to California... Vanni and I hired a car from Rent-a-Dent in Los Angeles and we set off to visit Forest Lawn Memorial Park, the setting for Evelyn Waugh's  The Loved One." In India he enjoyed the views but not the food: "On my last morning, I ordered scrambled eggs again, hoping that something pleasingly yellow would appear on my plate. It was a vain hope. They were as grey as  before... A curled-up strip of bacon, mostly fat, was the only accompaniment." Who cares? And what is happening to Circe? The long absences make Bailey's cloying expressions of affection and admiration sound like just so much sales talk.   There will, I suppose, be readers who are fascinated by the descriptions of louche society, but those who bought the book to read about the dog will feel more than cheated - they will be tempted to send the RSPCA round. Circe has not been trained. She runs after cyclists. At the end of a chapter concerned with David - a theatrical costumier who meets the regular fate of Bailey's friends - she "dashed into the traffic" on Hammersmith bridge. "The ever-practical David leapt after her... catching her by the scruff of the neck and slapping her until she yelped."   There is more wrong with that description of events than the strange mixture of past and pre sent tenses. The most elementary manual will explain that hitting a dog which has been absent without a lead is not the way to encourage it to return in future. Nothing Bailey writes about Circe suggests that he is really interested in her; she is merely an extension of him.   In the end she dies. But I do not accuse  A Dog's Life of being necrophiliac. Its crime is far worse than that - worse even than encouraging dog lovers to believe, by false pretences, that they will enjoy reading the casual reminiscence. Bailey clearly believes that the little book bursts with "charm". The flyleaf promises that it will be "touching" and every page attempts, with a chilling deliberation, to appeal not to sentiment but to sentimentality. I hated it, and I hated being conned into reading it.