Crossing the Lines <br />by Melvyn Bragg <br />400pp, Sceptre, £17.99   You will recall that Joe Richardson had a difficult childhood. His early life was disrupted first by his father going to war and then by the return of a virtual stranger. But I always suspected that the young man would win through to a place at Oxford and possibly both a job at the BBC and a seat in the House of Lords. Melvyn Bragg's Crossing the Lines is, like The Soldier's Return and A Son of War, unashamedly autobiographical - same town, same college at Oxford. And it is all the better for that. The evocation of time and place, like the memory of youthful hopes and fears, would not have possessed such moving authenticity if the author had not written about what he knew.  Joe had ideas above what many of his contemporaries regarded as his station. The sixth-form schoolboy reads  For Whom the Bell Tolls in bed, enjoys listening to classical music on the radio and says his prayers before he goes to sleep. His natural priggishness is disturbed by sex. He turns from Beethoven to Elvis Presley and, thinking of the next day, wonders: "Would she be there?" Thousands of young men of Bragg's generation went through the same metamorphoses: cerebral first and carnal second.   Truth alone does not make a novel. But Bragg adds a sense of excitement about the new world that is waiting for young Joe to the disturbing veracity of Crossing the Lines. The adventure carries with it great responsibilities. Joe was part of a generation who were "the first of their kind to be off the land after centuries in thrall to it, first out of the mines and out of the factories". His teachers saw themselves as leading their pupils into a "new and better life through the salvation of scholarships". Joe cannot let them, or his parents, down.   Not all the Wigton boys were so lucky. Speed - "destined like his elder brother for Borstal" - becomes a soldier, but is dismissed from the service with ignominy because he beats up a private from another regiment who refers to his officer as "a bit of a nancy boy", but refuses to explain why he suddenly became homicidal. It is one of the several false notes in the book. The error is, I suspect, less the result of Bragg's inexperience of military life than the consequence of a well-known syndrome among successful people of his age and background. He has grown sentimental about the virtues of the people he left behind.   Bragg suffers from no illusions about the character defects of the postwar upwardly mobile - a group which Joe Richardson represents in almost every particular. Success has its penalties. Joe's father, offered "one of the jewels in the brewery's crown" - the chance to run a prosperous public house in Workington - moves the family out of Wigton. Joe insists on staying with his Auntie Grace and joining his parents only at weekends. He is consumed by "the uncontrollable force of fear of leaving the town, the school, the Known". Yet we know that, if he is to fulfil the hopes of his teachers and the destiny of his generation, he will have to face the unknown time after time.  Crossing the Lines records the growing pains of the emergent working class.   At least Joe manages his sexual initiation with great aplomb. Bragg heroes always do. He is far more disconcerted by the discovery that he is being "entered for Oxford". There is the chance that his hopes will be frustrated when Rachel, his girlfriend, fears that she might be pregnant. He determines, like the man he is, to stand by her and find a job in Wigton. But all is well - we always knew it would be - at least in terms of unwanted infants. Rachel becomes the symbol of the gap which is opening up between Joe and home. Ironically, she is the first to break away. In a twist that gives a subtle reality to the relationship, the bank   clerk loses interest before the undergraduate.   The relationship drags on, allowing Joe to write her letters of naive concern that describe Oxford in the language of a bewildered, but delighted, schoolboy. Gradually the new life takes over and, by the end of his first year, he plans to spend most of the long vacation far away from Wigton. That town belongs to the time of Rachel, which is gone for ever. Not only Joe changed. The revolution that sent men like him to Oxford changed the world.   It may be that  Crossing the Lines - unlike the first two volumes of the trilogy - is meant to be an allegory of that universal change. And that may be why it has less emotional force than its predecessors, which were simple stories brilliantly told. Or perhaps the modern world has grown bored with real life Joe Richardsons, like Bragg and me, continually boasting that we were the storm-troops of a social revolution - never forgetting, but remembering with advantages, that we were the first to cross the line.  Roy Hattersley's A Yorkshire Boyhood is reprinted this month by Little, Brown.