The Struggle for Europe: A History of the Continent since 1945<br />by William Hitchcock<br />Profile £25, pp528 The title is exact, specific and precise. Yet most potential readers, brought suddenly face to face with The Struggle for Europe, will make the wrong assumption about its subject. These days, the mention of Europe in transition is assumed to introduce arguments about the single currency, the enlargement of the European Union and the advantages of more political integration transforming what used to be called the Common Market into what might become a single federal state. We have begun to forget the forces, far stronger than the vision of Schuman and Monnet, which originally drove together the fissiparous democracies of the Western hemisphere. The Struggle for Europe jogs our memories. Less than half of its 500 pages are devoted to the EU. Most of the book either sets out the history of the land - which stretches 'from the Urals to the Irish Sea and from Norway's Arctic fjords to Malta's sun-baked beaches' - before the Treaty of Messina or examines aspects of its more recent development which the Treaties of Rome and Maastrict did not touch. The narrative is far stronger than the analysis. When Hitchcock has opinions about what Europe is, was and ought to be, they are usually expressed by implication. His account of the 'young Somali whose country is wrecked by civil war and famine' spending 'a month in jail, suffering beatings and surviving on starvation rations' ends with the question: 'And why not?' It is more than rhetorical. Hitchcock is on the side of the potential immigrant because he applauds the instinct for improvement and possesses a touching faith in the free market. But the most important influence on his judgment is his almost messianic belief in the idea of Europe. The young Somali will risk any hardship to move west because: 'Fortunately, Europe is a fortress, but within its walls is a promised land.' By the end of the book, Hitchcock leaves the reader in little doubt that he believes that, too. The early chapters of The Struggle for Europe build on the commonly held, but implausible, theory that 'the very intensity of the war... despite the destructive impact on the landscape and people... had, in the long run, a positive effect on the European economies'. The idea is heroic but wrong. Industry is more likely to innovate from a position of strength than from a posture of weakness, as demonstrated by the greater progress made in the US without the blessing of bombing and blitzkrieg. Hitchcock's parallel contention, that the 1939-45 war (and the Cold War which followed) bound the Western democracies together is true but too obvious to need much examination. The success of that collaboration - formal and structural, in partnership with, and independent of, the US - convinced the liberated states of the old Warsaw Pact that it was in their interests to join the economic union. God, it seems, is a federalist. The Struggle for Europe leaves no doubt that Europe remains not much more than a Zollverein, with just as much political integration as is necessary to make the still basically economic union work. The EU is, he says, 'a web of overlapping institutions, designed to allow its members to achieve together certain objectives - security, stability, prosperity - that they could not achieve alone'. Margaret Thatcher is rightly cited as the high priestess of that limited belief. She 'did not like federation or bureaucracy, but she embraced the cause of trade liberalisation as consistent with her own struggle against regulation and nationalisation in Britain'. Correct. But she was not as successful in holding back integration as Hitchcock suggests. Indeed, the final pages, which perhaps charity requires us to accept were written in a hurry, give a hugely distorted view of what Lady Thatcher achieved in her last European years. 'The only way out of the crisis, argued Jacques Delors [president of the Commission], was to improve Europe's growth by cutting its cost and making it more efficient. This required trimming Europe's massive welfare benefits.' Has Hitchcock never heard of what is commonly called Delors II? Lady Thatcher called it 'socialism by the back door' and its careful exposition by the author of the policy convinced British trades unions virtually overnight - or at least in the space of the day in which he addressed the Trades Union Congress - that Europe was committed to recreating the welfare state that Tory governments were demolishing. In his final paragraph, Hitchcock asserts: 'Europe must find a better way of mobilising its people and generating the open, proud and sincere support that any truly united community requires.' The best way to achieve that in Britain is to implement the whole of the Maastrict social chapter and prove that the EU exists for its citizens as well as its corporation. That final call to arms aside, the last few pages of The Struggle for Europe read like an Open University fact sheet with keywords in heavy type and the shape and size of the EU set out like items in a child's guide. The description of the slow movement towards dtente is undoubtedly the strongest part of the book. The fact that it deteriorates thereafter should not detract from the clarity of his description of those eventful years. Rightly, he picks out Willy Brandt as the hero of the early thaw. When he laid out his Ostpolitik, including the Federal Republic's commitment to the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, he knew he must face the antagonism of the West German public (who thought he was going too far too fast) and the East German leadership who thought he was setting an American trap. But he pressed on. Had he flinched, the subsequent upheaval in the Warsaw Pact might have been delayed for a generation or more. Reading Hitchcock's description of the Soviet Union's 'one step forward and one step back' approach to liberalisation, it seems barely possible that half-a-dozen of its erstwhile satellites have now either joined, or hope to join, the controversial Union. After the death of Stalin, Lavrenti Beria, head of the Soviet secret police, released political prisoners in the hope that a sudden act of liberalisation would make him more popular than other members of the post-Stalin troika. The stratagem failed both for him and the whole Eastern bloc. Mikhail Gorbachev's attempts at reform were both more genuine and more successful. But they, too, nearly foundered. His economic reforms, prejudiced by the Chernobyl disaster, were followed by near economic collapse. A lesser man might have turned back. Gorbachev reminded the Soviet people that Chernobyl itself was a failure in the system, eloquent testimony to the inefficiency and corruption of the 'control economy'. Instead of abandoning his reforms, he extended them. Gorbachev and Brandt are the two heroes of postwar Europe, the men who, in their different ways, made it possible for the West to worry about harmonising indirect taxes and abolishing border controls within the boundaries of a heterogeneous and, in many ways, artificial union, which now includes old Soviet satellites. The problem with the supernational building which they made possible is the difficulty of making its progress seem heroic - or even exciting. The Struggle for Europe does not provide much help in overcoming that problem.