Jesse James: Last Rebel of the Civil War<br />by TJ Stiles<br />Cape £20, pp546 From the end of the American Civil War in 1865 to the death of Jesse James in 1882, the governors of the state of Missouri issued more than 300 proclamations offering rewards for the apprehension, dead or alive, of train robbers, bush-wackers and bandits. Only four of the wanted notices put prices on the heads of the James brothers, Jesse and Frank. Yet the 'James Boys', as Hollywood came to call them, have become central characters in the saga of the Old West, while the other outlaws have been forgotten. TJ Stiles - in a biography as serious as his preference for initials over given name suggests - has set out to describe what it was about Jesse (with Frank part of the full supporting cast) that turned him into a legend. Geography has always shaped history. And Jesse James was essentially a product of Missouri - a state which hovered between the Union and the Confederacy. On 14 September 1861, when the 14-year-old Jesse James saw Federal troops for the first time, the rebels had just won a spectacular victory at Manassas. It seemed that the South and slavery were safe. But then the fortunes of war changed and a new way of life was imposed on the plantations. According to Stiles, James, unwilling to accept defeat, became a guerrilla, not a thief. For most of his lawless life it was difficult to distinguish between the two occupations. But there is no doubt that he learnt to kill - and began to enjoy killing - while serving with a band of irregulars led by the appropriately named 'Bloody Billy'. The guerrillas surged into the enemy. The chase continued into Centralia itself, where the rebels dispersed to track down hiding Federals. They shot them on the road, in bedrooms, even in an outhouse... Stiles goes on to describe 'the blood drunk crew', James among them, scalping 17 corpses, slicing off ears and sawing off heads. They were not, he argues, 'sadistic fiends' but 'young men in a bitter war' which had 'created the culture of atrocity'. Dead Japanese soldiers were, he claims, treated in the same way during the Second World War. James - son of a slave-owning evangelist of the Second Great Awakening - believed that he was defiling the bodies in a good cause. After the North's victory, editors of Southern papers began what they believed to be a philosophical assault on 'yankonigger bayonet amendments to the constitution'. Among them was John Newman Edwards, co-founder of the Kansas City Times and author of  The Chivalry of Crime. It exalted lawlessness in general and the Confederate guerrillas' behaviour in particular as 'feats of stupendous nerve and fearlessness that makes one's hair rise to think about it.. poetic, superb'. Although James certainly knew that his bank robberies were being described in that language, it is hard to believe that it was The Chivalry of Crime which persuaded him to continue the robbery and violence after the Civil War had ended. Certainly the widespread antagonism towards the greedy railroad bosses made any attack on them more acceptable than an assault on any other industry or institution. But the notion that 'under the influence of Edwards, Jesse James had grown in sophistication and ambition' to become an American Robin Hood is fanciful. He became a man who murdered to rob banks. Stiles's scholarship is so extensive and inclusive that it is dangerous to argue with a word that he writes. But the admirable detail that gives the book its undoubted authority provides evidence to justify the belief that really James was just a homicidal thief who was lucky to have his life romanticised in motion pictures and Wild West shows. In Gallatin, Missouri, on the afternoon of 7 December 1869, James walked into the Davies's County Savings Bank and asked for a promissory note to be cashed. The cashier sat at his desk and began to write. James reached under his coat and pulled out a revolver. He aimed the barrel at the cashier's chest and squeezed the trigger. Before the cashier could topple from his chair, James aimed squarely at his forehead and fired again. The Civil War had then been over for four years. James's position in history is probably less the result of his motivation than the consequence of his good luck. Even the most squalid episodes in his life were romanticised, if not ennobled, by the way in which they turned out. After shooting the Daviess County Bank cashier, 'Jesse snatched up a portfolio on the cashier's desk and the brothers mounted and spurred their horses for the edge of town'. A gunshot made James's mare rear and throw him from the saddle. His foot caught in a stirrup and he was dragged along the street before he shook himself free. Frank James turned back, fought off his brother's pursuers and eventually escaped with Jesse sitting behind him. The scene has been reproduced in a dozen Hollywood films. Stiles argues that, although the train robberies and the bank hold-ups continued for more than a decade after the end of the Civil War, 'the meaning was gone'. James's continued hunger for publicity promoted increasingly boastful press releases. But the references to 'the Lost Cause' were replaced by simple braggadocio. 'We are the boys that are hard to handle and will make it hot for the party that ever tries to take us.' In the end, he was 'taken' by two bounty hunters. The assassins were convicted of murder but pardoned. Only Rabbi Elias Eppstein of Kansas City questioned the morality of a human being ingratiating 'himself into the friendship of a man to abide his time to assassinate him for blood money'. Amen to that. But, as TJ Stiles's scholarly work makes clear, the squalid death was an appropriate end to a squalid life left unredeemed by the pretence of adherence to a greater cause.