Number Ten<br />by Sue Townsend<br />336pp, Michael Joseph, £15.99 The first chapter is Sue Townsend at her absolute best. Compassion shines through the unashamedly ironic social commentary. But, as I read the next 50 pages, I began to wish that I had not agreed to review this book. I immensely admire Ms Townsend and I did not enjoy the prospect of complaining about a surfeit of what is usually only an occasional self-indulgence. Townsend enjoys overdoing it, so her satire is never subtle. Her prime minister "wore his hair long" when he was at Cambridge and played in a rock band called Vile Insinuations. The Downing Street press secretary is Alexander McPherson. (He began his career in journalism by composing bogus letters for an erotic magazine.) The chancellor of the exchequer, a man of "huge bulk", is called Malcolm Black. The fault may lie in me, but I find the heavy humour of the caricatures tedious. So tedious in fact that - had I been reading  Number Ten purely in the hope of enjoying myself - I would have given up the struggle at about page 40. And that would have been a gigantic mistake. For, once the characters are established, the book is a delight: it is genuinely funny and combines humour with an important message. The plot is simple enough. The prime minister, Edward Clare (married, you will be astonished to learn, to the cleverest woman in Europe), has become anxious about his personal popularity. So, accompanied by Jack, a policeman who normally stands outside the door of No 10, he sets out on a public relations odyssey. Some of their escapades are manically improbable. In order to preserve his anonymity, Edward Clare disguises himself as a woman, after which a number of Marx Brothers-type catastrophes follow. But even the broadest barbs of humour are laced with asides which, in themselves, make  Number Ten worthwhile. Jack is a self-educated intellectual who, when he goes home to visit his mother in Leicester, wants to watch Edward Clare on  Face the Press "because of his increasingly close relationship with the prime minister". His mother's interests, however, centre entirely on celebrities. She hopes to spot Sir Cliff Richard in the specially invited audience "and try to work out from his face whether or not he was a virgin". Whatever Townsend's views on that vital question, there is no doubt about her position on the political spectrum. Woken early one morning by his son, Morgan, and cross-examined about his attitude towards the Tolpuddle Martyrs, the prime minister feels unable to share the boy's apparent enthusiasm for direct action. In any case, he has a busy day ahead and has no time for philosophical debate. "Dad," Morgan asks, "is there anything you'd die for?" Clare answers with an ambiguity which proves that Townsend can be subtle when she wants to be. "Not now, son." The point is extended when the prime minister discusses his late father with the policeman. "The money from his estate went to the party", although, at the time of his death, "he was chairman of the Berkshire Conservative Association". Clare thinks that "he should have brought his will up to date". Jack is amazed that he could make such a fundamental change to his principles which, he believes, "should not be a moveable feast". Thus begins their first quarrel. "Look, Jack," the prime minister says (he always begins "Look" and then pauses when he feels under pressure). "You can't eat principles, neither can you be housed, clothed or educated by them." After various adventures in wonderland - including infatuation with Peter, a blue budgerigar, near-apprehension by the drugs squad and a friendship with a sympathetic, though stereotypical Pakistani, Edward Clare returns, with some reluctance, to No 10 Jack falls in love and the chancellor, Black, continues to agonise about his prospects of becoming prime minister. There is a touching scene in which Black helps Clare's son with his homework because his project involves reading Engels's  The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844. "The boy," he explains, "is a socialist." And his father is ill-equipped to deal with anything that involves that topic. So everybody lives happily ever after - except Peter the budgerigar. Given what animal rights activists would call essential freedom, he uses his liberty to fly into Trafalgar Square, where he is killed by stronger birds. The moral of that final tragedy is that rights ought to be matched with responsibilities. Perhaps New Labour has got it right after all.