Wilfred Owen: The Truth Untold<br />by Dominic Hibberd<br />Weidenfeld &amp; Nicholson £25, pp400 A poet must be judged by his poetry. The facts of his life and the circumstances of his death explain what inspired or inhibited his work, but they can neither enhance nor diminish it. But Wilfred Owen has achieved a status in the public mind which makes the poetry almost incidental to the story of the handsome young officer who fought his way back to health and the front line in the psychiatric hospital at Craiglockhart. His biography has all the ingredients of romantic fiction. The malevolent suspicion that 'neurasthenia' was a symptom of cowardice was triumphantly overcome when, in the words of C Day Lewis, he returned to active service because 'he felt that there he would be in a better position to voice his protests against the war and speak for his comrades'. And the drama ends with the death of the 25-year-old hero, killed - one week after winning the Military Cross and five days before the end of the war - while leading his men in a gallant, but unsuccessful, attempt to cross the Oise-Sambre Canal. The tragedy is made more poignant by the desperation - misguided but understandable in the circumstances of the time - with which Owen's family attempted to hide his homosexuality and therefore deny his true character. The meeting at Craiglockhart with Siegfried Sassoon, also, in Sassoon's own phrase, a 'Uranian', was, in its way, a turning point in Owen's poetic life. Frank criticism combined with encouragement in long discussions on the purpose of poetry. Through Sassoon, Owen met Robert Graves and Osbert Sitwell, poets of very different styles who were united by their detestation of a system which allowed, indeed encouraged, the slaughter in France and Flanders. Throughout his life, poetry was everything and everywhere. The strength of Dominic Hibberd's biography is the way in which the narrative encompasses the details of Owen's strange life without letting the reader forget that it is the development of a poet which is the most important part of the plot. A few weeks before his death, Owen showed Sitwell verse he had written in the autumn of 1914. The willingness to expose his juvenilia to critical view was an indication of his growing confidence. Hibberd does not let it pass as a brief indication of character development. The poem is, he points out, 'Wilfred's first exercise in the Decadent manner',   possibly showing the influence of Wilde and Swinburne. Hibberd's biography misses neither the human interest nor the personal drama. But the poetry always shines through. The poetry of the First World War sometimes seems to have been the preoccupation of officers and gentlemen with only Isaac Rosenberg representing the other ranks. The most famous portrait of Owen - trim military moustache, hair parted exactly in the middle and collar pinned neatly beneath his tie   knot - adds to that impression. But Owen's origins, although hardly humble, were very different from Sitwell's and Sassoon's. He was a child of that most artistically unfashionable social group, the lower middle classes. Tom Owen, after service with the Indian railways, returned to England to work, initially, in gentlemen's outfitting. Wilfred was born while his father was in trade at Oswestry but, by the time the boy was ready for school, Tom had returned to the world of steam and coal and become stationmaster at Birkenhead. His son was educated at the Birkenhead Institute where he qualified for a place at London University. His family could not afford the tuition fees. So he started work, first as 'lay assistant' to an Anglican vicar and then as an English tutor in France. His insecurity began to show. In Bordeaux, he pretended to be the son of a baronet, waiting to go up to Oxford, an episode in his life which requires readers to remember that it is the quality of his poetry, not his character, which is important. Hibberd never lets us forget it. Poetry encouraged him to go to war. In France, he became attracted by the work of Laurent Tailhade, a pacifist who became the impressionable young man's literary mentor. In November 1914, Owen wrote home to say: 'Tailhade, together with Anatole France, is shouldering a rifle! Now I may be led into enlisting when I get home.' In October 1915, he joined the Artists' Rifles and, eight months later, he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Manchester Regiment. His first war poems reflected the admiration of sacrifice which was so popular before the slaughter on the Somme. He never quite descended to the morbid sentimentality of Brooke's 'dying has made us rarer gifts than gold' or Asquith's 'gone to join the men of Agincourt'. But he did compare dead soldiers to Christ and exhibited what Hibberd calls 'pride in being associated with battle-hardened poets'. Out there, we've walked quite friendly up to Death<br />Sat down and eaten with him, cool and bland... And, as Hibberd bravely points out, 'Anthem for Doomed Youth', the poem by which Owen is most vividly remembered, 'is the work of a romantic, decadent and still patriotic poet'. Sassoon's bitter irony was absolutely alien to Owen's romanticism. But he helped with the conversion which produced a sudden, irresistible compulsion to denounce phoney heroism even before he enjoyed 'the reputation for gallantry' which he had once thought the essential preparation for rebellion against the war. The result was what he called 'the gas poem'. Watching 'the blood come gurgling from froth-corrupted lungs', he concluded that anyone who had seen the 'guttering, choking, drowning' would not repeat To children ardent for some desperate glory,<br />The old Lie. Dulce et decorum est<br />Pro Patria mori. There followed 'Disabled' ('Now he will spend a few sick years in institutes') and then six more poems in a week. He still claimed that he did not write about heroes: 'English poetry is not yet fit to speak of them.' His subject was war and the pity of war. It was understanding that the poetry is in the pity that made him the finest poet of the First World War.