The Pilgrimage of Grace<br />by Geoffrey Moorhouse<br />Weidenfeld and Nicholson £25, pp448 There is one civil war of which we rarely speak. Yet the rebellion, which is barely mentioned in our history books, came close to deposing Henry VIII from the throne of England and securing the realm for the Roman Catholic faith. Had the rebels pressed on, they might have achieved both objectives. But, after a little more than a year of skirmishes and negotiations, they capitulated, lulled into surrender by the mistaken belief that the crown had power to crush them, that the king would meet their reasonable demands and that the promise of pardons would be kept. Failure, unless it is accompanied by the sort of bogus romance that has sanctified the Jacobite rebellion, does not command the same attention as success. It is, however, the complications, not the conclusions, of the 1536 uprising - the complex motives of the men who led it, the shifting alliances by which it was sustained and the duplicity with which it was confounded - that have deterred historians. Fortunately, Geoffrey Moorhouse believed himself capable of untangling the neglected story. His confidence was entirely justified. Somehow, he manages to set out the detail without ever slackening the pace or his narrative.  The Pilgrimage of Grace is history as it should be written. The high moral tone of the rebellion can be judged from both its name and the opening words of the Oath of Honourable Men which Robert Aske - eventually its reluctant leader - required his followers to swear. All the pilgrims had to be against personal gain, envy and heretics. They were obliged to be for Almighty God, the Holy Church Militant and the 'preservation of the King's person and his issue'. The apparent conflict between the loyalty of their sentiments and the treasonable character of their conduct was reconciled by the insistence that they only wanted to protect their sovereign from 'evil councillors with villein blood' who had led him into transgression. The conduct about which they particularly complained was the breach with Rome following the king's divorce from Catherine of Aragon. The aspect of the Reformation to which they most passionately objected was the closure of the monasteries and the sequestration of their land and treasure. Moorhouse gives numerous examples of the holy relics and precious objects that Henry stole or attempted to steal. There is, however, no suggestion that the men who rose up against the thefts had the slightest interest in their commercial value. The crucifixes, the reliquaries and the Communion chalices, which they were prepared to defend with their lives, were the tangible symbols of faith. It was sacrilege to melt them down to finance high life at Windsor and Greenwich. As the campaign continued, other aspirations turned into demands. At one point, the rebels even proposed a parliament for Yorkshire with its headquarters in York. But their real concern was respect for their religion. The strength of their feeling can be judged by the numbers of men who were mustered and the speed with which they rallied to the cause. Within four days of a handful of Wharfedale notables being recruited to the pilgrimage, 10,000 rebels mustered in Richmond. Had the pitched battle that Aske anticipated come about, the pilgrims would have matched the strength of Henry's army and certainly fought with a conviction that the royal army could not match. Henry had cut his soldiers' pay to below the rate they had received from his father 10 years before. One troop of cavalry were so ill-equipped that they rode bareback until their commander bought saddles with his own money. That sort of detail enlivens almost every page of  The Pilgrimage of Grace and it brings to life the account of towns occupied, nobles recruited and the bargains struck. The bargains and offers of bargains are central to the story. It may well have been their nave willingness to accept bogus offers of compromise that convinced Henry that the pilgrims could be beaten. The agreement that the monasteries would accept the authority of the king's commissioners, on the understanding that the authority would be used to restore their treasure and independence, was never a genuine basis for peace. Kings, ruling by divine right, do not negotiate with common men. The pilgrims were neither ruthless nor cunning enough to win. Nor were they ever sufficiently integrated under a single command, even though they enjoyed inspired leadership. Aske was clearly a man of huge ability. There may not, writes Moorhouse, 'be another significant figure in English history of whom we know so little'. But  The Pilgrimage of Grace certainly makes the best of the information which the author possesses. It was Aske, a Yorkshireman, who turned a series of local uprisings - the first was in Lincolnshire - into a rebellion that encompassed the whole north of England. Reluctant to take command, he was catapulted into authority when (by mistake) the bells of Howdenshire rang to warn of what locals believed to be a punitive expedition by the royal forces. He made several attempts to abdicate, but remained 'Captain' until he was beheaded in York. With half-a-dozen more facts to build on, Moorhouse would have made Aske one of England's great folk heroes.  The Pilgrimage of Grace reveals a remarkable talent for making history come to life through illustrative anecdotes. Right at the end of the rebellion, Sir John Bulmer waited apprehensively at Lastingham as the Duke of Norfolk exacted a terrible revenge on Henry's rebellious subjects. Bulmer, although he had done no more than watch for the king's fleet arriving off the coast, was summoned to London to account for his conduct. He announced that he would rather be put on the rack than be parted from his wife. She vowed she would rather be torn to pieces than travel to the capital. The only way of avoiding Norfolk's injunction seemed to be a revival of the rebellion, which they duly helped to organise. Thus is the course of history determined. Geoffrey Moorhouse has done a great service by filling in one of the great gaps in our understanding of England's past.