It has been a bad year for political books, because it has been a bad year for politics. The Labour leadership has only contempt for ideological debate, while the Conservatives struggle ineffectually to establish a distinct political identity; the result has been a year of comment and controversy which devoted far more time and space to personalities than to politics - and none at all to the rival philosophies that ought to divide the parties.  The two strongest personalities in politics are Gordon Brown and Tony Blair. So, inevitably, the political blockbuster of 2001 was devoted to their complicated relationship. Jim Naughtie's  The Rivals  (Fourth Estate, £16.99) was what publishers call "a good read". But although the story raced along, it revealed very little that was new about the fraught friendship. Its appealed to readers who enjoy the inconsequential details of parliamentary life; anyone who is excited to learn exactly where Peter Mandelson was taking tea when he decided to support Blair rather than Brown in the leadership election will enjoy it immensely.   As a consolation prize, Brown now runs the country in the guise of chancellor of the exchequer. Richard Holt's  Second Amongst Equals  (Profile, £20) analysed the relationships between a succession   of chancellors and prime ministers. The hard fact that its analysis revealed, but did not concede, is that there is no common pattern to the uneasy partnership. The prime minister is technically the senior incumbent, but he is not necessarily the more powerful: Hugh Gaitskell imposed his will on Clement Attlee. It may be that Labour chancellors always want to act that way, and some of them succeed.   If the second volume of Paddy Ashdown's  Diaries  (Allen Lane, £25) is to be believed, he is one of those people who feels that the promise of Blairism has not been realised. Indeed, he has personal reasons to feel disappointed. If Blair and Brown are the Saul and David of politics - pleasant in opposition, and in government only occasionally divided - Blair and Ashdown were Abelard and Hloise. The star-crossed lovers might have lived happily ever after if the demands of a cynical world had not required the senior partner to renege on his promises and leave the abandoned suitor angry as well as bereft. Ashdown's story about the dashed hopes of coalition received surprisingly little publicity. Some Liberal Democrats believed that, like Hloise, he should not have got into bed in the first place.   In anticipation of the general election, Anthony Seldon edited yet another of his collections in which notables ruminate on the    subject of their specialisation.  The Blair Effect  (Little, Brown, £14.99), which claimed to be a critique of New Labour's first five years, included an essay by Vernon Bogdanor describing the government's constitutional reforms as "radical and far-reaching". To be fair to Professor Bogdanor, both the "reforms" of the House of Lords (which confirm its status as an assembly lacking all democratic legitimacy) and the terrorism bill (which turns its back on habeas corpus) were products of the new parliament. But he should have seen the authoritarianism coming long before the 2001 campaign was over.   The course of the campaign in Henley was charted by Boris Johnson (Conservative candidate in that constituency and editor of the  Spectator) in a little self-indulgence called  Friends, Voters, Countrymen  (HarperCollins, £14.99). It was, in its trivial way, great fun. Johnson is a master of the self-deprecating joke, which readers so easily mistake for modesty; but it is an examination of electioneering in the way that a Barbara Cartland novel is a scientific study of sexual mores in Regency England.   The best of the year's political fiction came from Andy McSmith, chief political correspondent for the  Telegraph. Cheap jokes about on-the-job training need to be balanced against the plausibility of his plot and the credibility of his    dialogue.  Innocent in the House  (Verso, £13) managed to tell a compelling story and, at the same time, comment on the slow death of the legislature's independence from the executive.   It seems likely that Betty Boothroyd's  Autobiography (Century, £17) will win a place in political history as the first blow struck against Elizabeth Filkin, then the parliamentary commissioner for standards, who although not popular with the Commons was canonised by newspapers of every political persuasion. There was no question of the first lady Speaker being part of a whispering campaign; her criticisms could not have been more open or direct. The book was a bestseller - less because of the quality of its writing or the extent of its revelations than because we all like Betty.   Before he was elected Labour party leader, Neil Kinnock was said to be "the most popular boy in the school". The tabloid newspapers quickly changed all that. Retired politicians should avoid quoting themselves, but until I read Martin Westlake's biography, I had forgotten that I had told Kinnock after the 1992 defeat, "When Labour wins the general election - as will clearly be within our power in four or five years time - much of the credit for victory will be owed to you." I might have added, "Of course, your contribution will not    be properly acknowledged." Westlake's  Kinnock  (Little, Brown, £25) begins to do justice to a very substantial politician who, although rapidly regaining his old prestige, is still underrated.   Trust the Liberal Democrats to spoil Labour's fun. Had it not been for Roy Jenkins,  Kinnock would have been the best political biography of the year, but that accolade must go the monumental  Churchill  (Macmillan, £30). There is something quintessentially Jenkinsesque in the way the author proclaims that his latest work depends entirely on secondary sources. But, as so often in the past, Jenkins's self-confidence has proved entirely justified.   The importance and the charm of  Churchill lie in the perspective from which it is written; it's clear that as Jenkins wrote about Churchill, he increasingly grew to like him. I find that almost as hard to understand as Jenkins's judgment that Churchill was (marginally) a greater man than Gladstone. And the notion that, having written about the Grand Old Man, he could not turn his hand to a politician of lesser status seems to devalue his own talent for making what he writes compelling in itself. But the incomprehensible enthusiasm has produced a great biography.