Death in Holy Orders <br />P D James <br />397pp, Faber, £17.99 <br /> Buy it at a discount at BOL<br /> A thriller it is not, nor is  Death in Holy Orders intended to justify that description. It proceeds at a pace appropriate to the speed of life at St Anselm's, the Anglican theological college at which most of the plot - "action" being quite the wrong word - is set. But P D James is able to meander with a sense of urgency. As a result, the absence of a new sensation in every chapter of her latest murder mystery increases the suspense rather than reduces the tension. Not once, as I read the description of Father Martin's bedroom, the paraphrase of Archdeacon Crampton's homily or any of the other vignettes of clerical life, did I think, "For God's sake, get on with it!" This is a novel of time and place as well as a detective story.  Indeed, by far the weakest moments in the book are the two occasions on which the author feels it necessary to make rapid progress by using the most artificial of literary devices, the narrative letter. The first, right at the beginning of the book, sets the scene. The second, near the end, explains the motives of the murderer. I suspect the publisher insisted that Commander Adam Dalgliesh should not extend his latest investigation to 400 pages.   Long ago, Baroness James convinced me that although coincidence is commonplace in life, in fiction it is usually unconvincing. Despite that indisputable truth,  Death in Holy Orders begins with a suspicious death in a part of East Anglia to which Commander Dalgliesh is about to set off for a (naturally well-earned) holiday. And Dalgliesh, as a boy, spent a summer at the college that the dead man had briefly attended. My irritation at the contrivance lasted for 30 seconds. The unlikely explanation of his early acquaintance with St Anselm's justifies the Commander's knowledge of theology and church history. "The Nicene Creed was formulated by the Council of Nicaea in the fourth century . . . The Emperor Constantine called the Council to deal with the Arian Heresy." Moments of independent erudition, though rare in the Metropolitan Police, are essential to the James style.   The often irrelevant though always compelling asides are almost invariably evocations of old England. Dalgliesh, on his way to view the corpse of Archdeacon Crampton, "could be sure that none of his officers would attempt to anaesthetise the horror by facetiousness and crude graveyard   humour". Anyone who did so "would not serve under him for long". The author's stern moral values are reflected on page after page. That, too, is one of the unique features of a P D James detective story.   Surprisingly, product identification - the curse of the modern novel - breaks out from time to time. Motor cars are rarely called motor cars. Dalgliesh has a Jaguar, Piers Tarrant (the sidekick without whom no fictional detective would be complete) an Alfa Romeo, and Sir Alfred Treeves (adoptive father of the first victim) a chauffeur- driven Mercedes. His murdered son was unpopular because he owned a Porsche. Perhaps the choice of vehicle is meant to illustrate class and temperament. But despite their different backgrounds, all the men meticulously fasten their seat belts before each journey. No character created by PD James would dare do otherwise.   The characters are cunningly constructed to carry James's message. Archdeacon Crampton is made into a hate figure with a description of the way he treats the college gardener. He becomes one of the essential features of a good detective story - a victim whose death readers do not mourn. But before he is murdered, he makes several attacks on what he regards as outdated attitudes. He is the enemy of elitism, the "seductive over-emphasis on ceremony" and the "temptation to overvalue intelligence". It cannot but be by choice that the assaults on tradition and convention are made by a man so small-minded that he worries about the damage that Blu-Tac does to college walls. Baroness James knows which side she is on.   Despite her expert knowledge of the Home Office and a life spent largely in London, James is at her absolute best on rural England - the world of wood fires, weed-free flagstones, pantries with brick floors and "the smell of moist earth and apples with a hint of paraffin" - places that give "the immediate impression of order and comfort". It is a world in which murder stories barely mention sex and, apart from the murders themselves, are wholly free of violence. P D James's flagstones and pantries are set in the 21st century, but the values their description represents are both loving and unfashionable. That is why Archdeacon Crampton had to die, and why the novels of P D James possess the special charm of fading memories.