Troublemaker: The Life and History of AJP Taylor<br />    Kathleen Burk <br />  506pp, Yale, £19.95  <br />   It was usual for tutorial fellowships at Magdalen College, Oxford, to be renewed every five years, in a ceremony as formal as it was archaic. But when AJP Taylor's name was read out at the college meeting of October 1952, the senior fellow declared his unwillingness to nominate a man who was an adulterer and, perhaps worse, a regular contributor to the  Sunday Pictorial.  After a moment's "stunned silence", another fellow proposed Taylor's re-election, and the resolution was carried with only two votes against. Not surprisingly, Taylor was profoundly hurt by the proceedings, and he was caused more pain by the behaviour of colleagues who failed either to congratulate him on his victory or commiserate with him about the unjustified attack on his suitability to teach the young. Taylor was a sensitive man, but not sufficiently sensitive to realise that he made enemies.  It might be said in defence of the Magdalen fellows - though  Troublemaker, an essentially reverential biography, does not say it - that it is easy to understand why they wanted Taylor in the college but could not bring themselves to offer him the hand of friendship. He was a brilliant historian and, from time to time, an intolerable human being. This biography's title does not merely echo that of Taylor's classic account of radical opposition to the bipartisan foreign policy of the 19th- and early 20th-century Liberal and Conservative establishments. Few public men have made more trouble, either public or personal.   A willingness to offend - and to take offence - seems to have characterised his behaviour from boyhood onwards. He attributed his failure to win a Balliol scholarship to the examiners' prejudice against a candidate with "no manners and a rough Lancashire accent". He could not accept that he had caused offence during his interview when, asked what a radical of his persuasion would like to see happen to Oxford, he replied "blow it up".   Very often his trouble was   made in the best possible causes. At the 1948 World Congress of Intellectuals, he was incensed by the speech of Aleksander Fadeyev, a Russian novelist, who implied that the Soviet Union had won the war by itself, and concluded as a criticism of western culture in general that "if monkeys could type, they would produce poems like TS Eliot's". Taylor, who prided himself on his intellectual independence, should have realised that a gathering with such a title was likely to be concerned more with propaganda than with the pursuit of knowledge. But he was not a man to be intimidated by his surroundings, and his spontaneous speech reminded delegates: "We and the French were the only people who went to war with Nazi Germany without being attacked." He went on to denounce "Yugoslavia's resistance being blotted out in order to suit the convenience of a political party". And he then thought it unreasonable that the Soviet Communists - who had organised the conference - were upset.   If Professor Burk conveys her mentor's character with anything like accuracy, Taylor suffered from the strange naivety that is often an attribute of hugely clever men. He clearly saw himself as immensely worldly, and had three wives and many rich and powerful friends to confirm his social sophistication. But he was blessed   with a simplicity - at least about his effect on other people - that goes close to making his intellectual arrogance endearing. He could never understand why, being both a great scholar and a brilliant teacher, he was denied so many professorships. And he remained sensitive right to the end. When he heard that Sir Nicholas Henderson (successively ambassador to France and America, and a friend who advised him on diplomatic issues) had made a joke about his slightly prejudicial pursuit of the truth, Taylor never spoke to him again.   It is easy to construct a list of the people Taylor offended. When broadcasting, he would often annoy other participants in the programmes by pointing out that he was the only well-informed, objective or intellectually inclined person in the studio. We will never know how much his radio and television success offended less media-friendly dons, though he was as didactic with other academic historians as he was with politicians. Whether or not it held back his academic career, television made Taylor a household name. He was a brilliant historian, and was capable of inspiring affection as well as respect among colleagues who chose to overlook his quirks of character. Yet he became a national figure because he was a "great communicator" - a man who could broadcast apparently  extempore lectures and make complicated subjects easily understandable.   During the last of his several existences, he did his best to alienate his more fastidious colleagues by the enthusiasm with which he embraced commercial success. "Once I discovered that I could earn money more easily by becoming a journalist," he wrote, "I slipped out of teaching history and I can almost say became a historian in my spare time." So perhaps he can't complain that to the wider public he was a man in heavy-rimmed spectacles with a frown and a bow tie who talked to camera as though he was sitting in the viewers' living room. By that he made history himself. He was the prophet of the age in which performing well on television is, more than any other single attribute, the guarantee of prosperity and popularity.