Inside Stalin's Russia: The Diaries of Reader Bullard 1930-1934 <br />edited by Julian and Margaret Bullard <br />Day Books, £19.50, 320pp  <br />Buy it at BOL Soviet communism was an economic catastrophe right from the start. And despite the government's attempts to hide the truth, the squalor that followed poverty was too desperate to hide. In the summer of 1932, "Cairns, a Canadian, employed by the Empire Marketing Board... visited western Siberia, Kazakhstan, various places along the Volga, the Ukraine, Crimea and Northern Caucasus", and reported what he saw to Reader Bullard, the British consul general in Moscow. "Everywhere large areas formerly cultivated were bare except for weeds." The results of "collectivisation" were visible at every railway station - "hundreds of people, many asleep, many begging, many just shivering in their rags". At Tatarskia, children "scrambled to lick the soup plates and eat the bones" after the workers had eaten their rations of "soup, two small slices of black bread and a small piece of fish".  Similar scenes could be observed all over the Soviet Union. While the kulaks - the small landowners who might have kept Russia fertile - were exiled to the mines (where "many hundreds died of exposure, typhus and smallpox"), the British ambassador "remarked that probably a couple   of million people would die of hunger this winter, but the authorities would not mind that". Yet men and women of immense intellect and otherwise undoubted integrity visited Moscow and announced that they had witnessed the dawn of a new civilisation. Bernard Shaw said that communist propaganda in schools was no different from the religious instruction which was forced on British pupils. Beatrice Webb was shocked only by the authorities' failure to ban lipstick.   Bullard always recorded the visit of a "fair-minded" observer in his diary; Malcolm Muggeridge was particularly commended for filing "strong" articles to the  Manchester Guardian. And his own daily entries were a model of careful, if occasionally regretful, objectivity. Bullard had gone to Moscow anxious "to judge for himself the success or failure of the socialist experiment... having started life as a poor boy in the East End of London, he felt instinctive sympathy" for the aims of the new regime. However, he quickly found its tyranny and cruelty intolerable. When it became clear that the forced labour, suppression of free speech and bureaucratic corruption did not even produce the promised economic results, the disillusion was complete. But he retained both his sense of proportion and his charitable impulse. Bullard understood why Jews never spoke out against Soviet excesses. The tsars had kept them at the bottom of the heap; under communism, they were treated no   worse than anyone else.   Bullard's diaries were composed with care for more than their objectivity. Knowing the penalty of attacking the communist leadership, he wrote his most startling revelations and stringent criticisms in code. It was cracked by his granddaughter, who thus opened the way for his son (Sir Julian Bullard, himself a distinguished diplomat) and daughter-in-law to edit this fascinating account of life under the commissars. Although the  Diaries cover only four years, they leave no doubt of the innate evil of Stalin's Soviet Union. The account of the 1931 beginning of the reign of terror, 1932 famine and 1933 prosecution of Metro-Vickers workers who were accused of spying will be of most value to historians. The journal is also a pleasure to read for anyone who appreciates straightforward English, and contains hilarious examples of the tribulations that are inseparable from the diplomatic life. Lady Muriel Paget, intent on doing good works, and her assistant Mrs Daunt are characters straight out of Anthony Powell.   No doubt Julian and Margaret Bullard were, at least in part, moved to edit the diaries because of their affection for a clearly remarkable man. But the result of their work, whatever it owes to filial piety, stands firmly on its own literary and historical merits. It is a savage condemnation of the inter-war Soviet Union. But it is also heartening proof that a clear head and hopeful heart can react to even the most hideous environment with clarity and courage.