This is the season when all who overdid the Quality Street and Bailey's Irish Cream must traditionally pay the price and hit the detox diet. Depending on your choice of newspaper guru, you can do it the Carol Vorderman way (millet and water) or take the Vanessa Feltz route (porridge and water).  As January wears on, it should, according to established ritual, swiftly dawn on us that not all physical blight is amenable to budgie food and an outlay of £12.99 for a Carol or Vanessa video. This is also the season of the health crisis. A year has passed since the NHS reached meltdown. Wards overflowed, cancer patients languished, Lord Winston lambasted a service "not as good as Poland's", and Tony Blair, the Grinch who stole Gordon's budget, was forced to proffer billions and the pledge of eventual parity with Europe.  The NHS Plan - Beveridge embroidered for a new century - promised the way to a modern, tax-funded system. Would it be enough to stave off a winter disaster likely to pose the biggest threat to the government in the run-up to an election? Not in the view of Mr Blair or Alan Milburn, who last month told us to brace ourselves for the worst.  An extra 343 critical care beds were laid on, plans were made to cancel non-emergency operations and the elderly were exhorted to get their flu jabs. Even so, Mr Milburn expected problems. The crisis never happened. Flu is running at an all-time low, and, in the absence of grans on trolleys, the only pensioners whose maladies make headlines are Princess Margaret and the Pope. Such is the dearth of health scare stories that the BBC allegedly had to confect its own, by suggesting - apparently misleadingly - that farmed salmon, fed on sun-tan pills to achieve the peachy bloom reminiscent of Michael Winner on a Barbados beach, may be the aquatic equivalent of the mad cow.  Of course, there is the threat of a measles outbreak, but it is hardly the government's fault if reckless parents refuse to have their children inoculated. There is the grim tally of Dr Shipman's casebook, now running at an estimated 265 murders. But nowhere, give or take a report on filthy hospitals, is there any residual evidence of a health service in freefall. Mr Milburn must hardly believe his luck. There cannot have been such an intoxicating whiff of euphoria in the air since the days when he used to work in Days of Hope, a left-wing bookshop nicknamed Haze of Dope.  The message now is progress. The Department of Health, which is prone to issue a press release every time the secretary of state puts the kettle on for a cup of his preferred Earl Grey tea, last week had genuinely good news to impart. The allocation of £87.5m to cancer services coincided with the announcement that waiting times have been slashed in nine pilot areas.  In addition, a £20m vaccination campaign has virtually eradicated meningitis C in Britain, a breakthrough hailed by an immunisation expert as 'a miracle'. Though Frank Dobson, Mr Milburn's beleaguered predecessor, was quick to remind  Daily Telegraph readers that the programme was his idea and, by implication, his miracle, the lustre attaches to the current health team, for whom more breakthroughs beckon. The human genome project presages the defeat of inherited disease. A vaccine against Alzheimer's is to go on trial.  Science and sound planning conspire to support Mr Milburn's view that "a corner is being turned" on health. Up to a point, he is right. But track back a few weeks to the descant of woe from health professionals unconvinced by the government's mood music. The BMA warned that doctors were falling into collective "clinical depression". The    Royal College of General Practitioners claimed more than 10,000 new GPs were essential, and the Royal College of Nursing reported a likely 90,000 exodus by 2004.  Barry Jackson, president of the Royal College of Surgeons and a key Mr Milburn adviser, told  The Observer  that change was so slow that patients would not be pleased with the NHS for another 10 years. Underlying this unease is the awareness that professional bodies, locked in by Mr Blair to support his reforms, may also take the rap if it all goes wrong. There are other caveats. The new-look NHS is an over-centralised monolith in which local initiative counts for too little.  Cancer and heart treatment, though vastly improved in some areas, is still a lottery. Rationing remains a taboo word, and the hard decisions politicians should take on who gets what are conveniently shifted to the National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Ageism prevails, and so does the harsh edict that elderly people in nursing homes must pay for a cup of tea or a change of bandage. Then there is the health gap, a problem that has failed to resonate with a government that craves instant, measurable results and forgets that its obsession with saving the NHS does not always square with saving those it is designed to serve. Successive reports (Black in the 1980s, Acheson in the 1990s) underlined that the poorer you are, the iller you get and the sooner you die.  The authors of the most recent study, in the current  British Medical Journal, updated a survey of Dickensian London and discovered that 100 years of policy initiatives had made almost no impact on health inequalities. Tony Blair has, as yet, failed to become as devout    a convert to redistribution as Ebenezer Scrooge. Though his targets are ambitious (the abolition of child poverty in 20 years), the reality, according to the latest figures, is 14.5m people living below the breadline. We know that they face bad health, more mental illness and premature death and, assuming one buys the neo-Darwinian theory, we know why.  In his book,  Mind the Gap, published this week, Richard Wilkinson argues that the caveman-meets-mastodon response of instant stress has translated into a chronic anxiety leading to increased blood pressure, heart disease and cortisol levels. If that is a simplistic synopsis of his argument, then the health department's remedies are hardly less sketchy. If only the poor would eat their broccoli and lay off the cigarettes and fried pies, then all would be well.  Such initiatives seem designed to feed middle-class views on responsible behaviour, just as a jumble of targets and initiatives are bait to middle-class voters most preoccupied by the state of the health service. That is not to say that the government has ducked the issue of poverty. Gordon Brown has ruled out across-the-board tax cuts and signalled special payments for families with small children beyond the £10-a-week children's tax credit to be introduced in April. Even so, an acknowledgment that bad health is inextricably linked with social division should, logically, come from the Department of Health.  So far, Mr Milburn has kept quiet. One can see his problem. The initiatives and partnerships needed to improve matters are complex. You cannot advance the not-very-good NHS Direct as an instant solution. You cannot vaunt the nation's 36 drop-in nursing centres (also of questionable quality, according to  Which?) as a fresh dawn. As for the news bulletins now regularly dispensed, in morphine-pump drips of comfort, they are both testament to the health secretary's success and a warning that a remodelled NHS pledging equal shares for all needs a vision much broader than vote-catching in May.