The poor are the new rich. Or so you might assume from some reactions to last week's report by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, which disclosed that a quarter of all Britons are living in poverty. 'Being poor means you can't afford a dinner party,' scoffed one report, conjuring up the vision of a dearth of Krug and roasted quail as the determinant of deprivation. In fact, being able to invite friends or family round, even for baked beans on toast, was low on the survey's list of basic necessities, which included beds, a damp-free home, a warm coat and a dictionary.  The final item, the  Daily Telegraph implied, might be of benefit to the Rowntree Foundation, accused in the paper's leader column of 'an assault on what words mean'. How dare researchers be 'shocked' at the finding that 17 per cent of British adults believe they are living in 'absolute poverty' as defined by the United Nations? What an insult to the poorest children in the world that citizens of the tenth richest country on the planet should muscle in on their status.   Leaving aside the fact that the  Telegraph  rarely directs its ire towards, say, the fate of Iraqi children condemned to hardship and death by Western sanctions, it is hard to accuse the Rowntree researchers of undue hyperbole. Under their methodology, two million children - or one in six - lack the necessities of life. This is relatively conservative, compared with Unicef's total of 4.5 million or the latest Office of National Statistics estimate of three million, based on a poverty line of less than 60 per cent of median income. But however you stack up the figures, the picture remains similar.   On the Rowntree assessment, poverty - as defined both by low income and   multiple deprivation - increased by more than a tenth between 1983 and last year. The poor, emphatically, are not the new rich. On the contrary, the rich are the new poor. One of the more surreal aspects of the petrol blockade was the right-wing assertion that the campaign for cheaper fuel was undertaken on behalf of the 'poorest in society'; always a useful totem in times of crisis. Since the poorest do not drive, the only likely winners were the better off - those Middle Englanders who submitted to the ordeal of taking to the roads on brand-new mountain bikes in search of the last chilled coronation chicken in Waitrose, hopeful that their impoverishment would at last be recognised.   And so it might be. Never mind that the moderately well-off, beneficiaries of a 1p cut in income tax and among the lightest overall taxation in Europe, have a shaky claim on deprivation. They are self-styled victors in round one of the battle for lower petrol duty, and the Prime Minister, for all his professions of obduracy, will have to listen. And where does that leave the destitute? Already there is speculation that the pre-Budget report in November, expected to focus on poor pensioners, may instead be skewed towards balm for irate drivers. Blair is in a bind. To some extent, it is one of his own devising.   In June 1997, he issued his pledge to the dispossessed. His stage set was the concrete walkways and stinking stairwells of the Aylesbury estate in Southwark, south London, and his message was unequivocal. 'For 18 years, the poorest people in our country have been forgotten by government. There will be no forgotten people in the Britain I want to build.' Of course, even the most stone-hearted of administrations bear in mind Aristotle's tenet that 'poverty is the parent of revolution and crime' and must be, where possible, minimised. In an age when  Germinal -style insurrection seems the monopoly of the well-heeled wishing to skim a penny or two off the price of a litre of super-unleaded, the poor retain the sanction of inflating crime statistics, clogging up the NHS and depressing school league tables.   Though the charge of cynicism may   be unfair, the Government has certainly been guilty of a plethora of fatuous tactics. If only the poor would lock up their delinquent children after dark, eat their broccoli, keep their squeegees off the windscreens of impoverished motorists, eschew divorce and follow the David Blunkett DIY guide to assisting with homework, they and we would all be better off. Such nanny statism tends to ignore evidence that discrepancies in health and education are not merely the result of lifestyle choices or even poor income. Inequality itself is the killer. Fat-cat bosses, beneficiaries of a 72 per cent pay rise since 1994, are less prone to stress than their worst-paid workers. A labourer on 40 cigarettes a day runs a greater health risk than a chief executive. The less-privileged worker is, as a correspondent once wrote to Harry Truman, 'an eight-ulcer man on four-ulcer pay'.   Blair is aware of all that. Hence his raft of worthwhile policies for the poor; a sincere attempt to redress the balance. The trouble is that reducing inequality has always been a subversive crusade in which New Labour, despite evidence of voter support for welfare spending, has shirked saying that higher taxation is the price of a fairer society with benefits to all. Instead it has preferred a patchwork of indirect taxes and backdoor redistribution designed to spare Middle England any suspicion that it is being clobbered. But now Mondeo man is at the barricades; partly because he has been propelled there by the right-wing press but also because Blair has allowed the myth of the something-for-nothing society to flourish. Meanwhile, convenient sources of cash for social projects - tax treatment of pension funds, the windfall levy on the privatised utilities - diminish. The Government is running out of road.   In a paper published last week, John Hills, a professor of social policy at the London School of Economics, says that 'inequality clearly rose at the start of Labour's time in office'. Its record after the first 18 months bears two interpretations, according to Hills. The first is that its programme, though cheaper than an 'Old Labour' policy of uprating benefits with incomes, has delivered as much to low-income groups while also improving work incentives. The alternative view is that 'tax and benefit reforms have only barely delivered enough to the lowest income groups to prevent inequality rising. By themselves the measures may stem the rising tide of inequality but not reverse it'. Either way, Hills argues that more money will have to be ploughed in to prevent back-sliding on any progress so far.   While not a wholesale indictment, such an assessment - coupled with the Rowntree Foundation's bleak audit of very recent figures - does not suggest that the DSS's own survey on poverty, out in a few days, will be entitled 'Mission Accomplished'. Nor does a chronicle of, at best, creeping progress and, at worst, mounting inequality echo Blair's ringing  putsch on poverty, delivered on the Aylesbury estate.   Since then, the very rich have thrived alarmingly. A combination of lavishly-trumpeted initiatives and grand, if distant, targets, such as eliminating child poverty by 2020, has fostered the idea that the worst-off are faring a lot better than they are. This comfortable misconception has lulled the affluent of Middle England into the barely-challenged notion that they are the ones deserving of a break: this time on petrol prices and, if that ploy works, perhaps a whole lot more besides.   Of course it is easy, and correct, to rail against piratical oil companies and arrogant Ministers. But Blair's problem is not bullishness but timidity. It is time now to acknowledge that if we want better public services and a substantial erosion of poverty, we shall have to pay for them upfront. If that lesson is learned, then the petrol protesters, unalluring as they are, will have done us all a big favour.