In an otherwise impeccably bland speech about the importance of trade unions (once they are "fit for the 21st century", that is) Cherie Booth comes up with a truly original thought. Pondering what would happen if there were no such bodies she writes: "That work itself is an expression of the human personality would go unrecognised." While one might expect Cherie to think of her own or her husband's career in this way, it is illuminating to discover that she believes that street cleaners and shelf stackers, chambermaids and security guards, experience a similar sense of professional fulfilment. Given the extent of Booth's political influence, her idiosyncratic thinking on this subject must also shed light on the government's obsession with turning people out to work. We are familiar with its conviction that the mothers of young children are best occupied in paid employment outside the home while their children are fed and watered in "high-quality childcare"; we recently heard a proposal from the IPPR thinktank to narrow that frivolous gap between retirement and the grave by postponing the former to age 67; now the government is wondering if all those idle grandparents shouldn't be pressed back into state service as cut-price childminders - thus liberating their children to pursue the vital business of working.  One grandparent who seems unlikely to make herself available in this way is Lady Thatcher, who remains, at the age of 76, fully committed to her own career. Despite being a source of infinite merriment to Labour politicians whenever she opens her mouth, she is actually a model of what the Blair/Booth work ethic proposes for all of us. At an age when so many of her peers aspire to do no more than cultivate their gardens, test their hammocks or spend time - gratis - with their grandchildren, she continues to seek expression of her personality through work. Though no one doubted her when in 1990 she threatened to be a "back-seat driver" to John Major, few could have expected that she would continue her unwelcome eruptions beyond his administration, through William Hague's leadership, right up to the present day with her publication of Statecraft, a collection of doomy utterances about one thing and another currently being serialised in the Times.  Initially Lady Thatcher's back-seat squawks and gesticulations - generally to the effect that the driver should keep to the right and steer well clear of Europe - were, at least, consistent with the tenacity and conviction of her own invincible rightness that had characterised her time in office.  "I cannot leave the future alone. I don't want it to go wonky or wobbly", was how she explained her interference in 1995. Seven years on, however, every intervention simply undermines her reputation. For one thing, it is she who now wobbles most dramatically, insisting that Britain should quit an institution she once embraced. "The first fruits of what would be called the Single European Act were good for Britain", she writes in The Downing Street Years.  For young people who neither know nor care how formidable she was in office, Lady Thatcher's current incarnation as a kind of female version of the Ancient Mariner - "Hold off! unhand me, grey-beard loon!" - is all that she will ever amount to.  And even those of us who marvelled at her extraordinarily lengthy domination over a party of resentful, scheming, often woman-despising men, can only wonder that she has allowed herself to become a revenant like Ted Heath, another politician who could not give up but loomed about the House decades after his deposition, glaring most horribly at his former protege. Occasionally, like Lady Thatcher today, Heath could not contain himself. "While I was in Australia", she records indignantly in her memoirs, "Ted Heath delivered a vitriolic speech in Manchester attacking my politics".  But "vitriolic" hardly begins to describe her sustained victimisation of her own successors. Major described her conduct as "intolerable". Even her doting confidant, the late Woodrow Wyatt, thought she should tone it down. "Sometimes I have tinges of disloyalty to Margaret," he confided to his diary. "She is complaining to everybody, 'I am gagged.'"  By the time Hague came along, her endorsement was as much a liability as her opposition. And now here she is again, prophesying the collapse of civilisation for those who do not heed her warnings, particularly on EU membership. While the Baroness's eerie lamentations have had their presumably intended effect of spooking Iain Duncan Smith - "The Wedding-Guest sat on a stone: /He cannot choose but hear" - they have also, of course, been entirely counterproductive in terms of advancing her cause. Even the Times was careful to accompany its extracts with comments from younger politicians dismissing her as an essentially irrelevant mischief-maker.  Was this the result she wanted? Whatever the merits of her argument, which is actually quite persuasive on the evils of the common agricultural policy, the more that moderate Euro-sceptics are tainted, by association, with her veiled insinuations of creeping EU Nazism and communism, the more federalists can present themselves, unopposed, as the voice of reason and historical inevitability.  Still, the Baroness does serve a useful purpose as a ghastly illustration of what happens to people who do not know when to stop. Like the man who emerges enlightened from the grip of the mariner's skinny hand - "A sadder and a wiser man, He rose the morrow morn" - the reader of Lady Thatcher's latest exhortations cannot but be affected by the experience.  Far from illustrating the practicality of working into your late 60s or 70s, she is the best ever advertisement for early retirement. And as for thinking that work is an expression of the human personality, here is living proof that that way, madness lies.<B>One of our slogans is missing, Mr Blunkett</B>Ringing with moral justice, entitlement and pragmatism, "Reclaim the Streets" is a resoundingly good slogan, far too good to be hogged by the battalion of Lycra-bottomed cyclists who used to occasionally block city streets in the mid-90s as a protest against car culture. Today, Reclaim the Streets does not merely insist on the rights of non-drivers - it is a pillar of the radical direct-acting establishment, "a participatory organisation", as one RTS website describes it. It represents activists of all kinds, from situationists,anarchists and full-time anti-globalisers to more capitalism-tolerant but nonetheless idealistic pedestrians and guerrilla gardeners. "The Reclaim the Streets idea has grown up and left home," boasts the London RTS website.  In fact, the Reclaim the Streets idea has come along so nicely that it recently attracted the attention of the home secretary, who adopted it for the government's ever-so-tough new campaign against street crime.  "We literally must reclaim our streets," David Blunkett said on Sunday, and his Tory shadow Oliver Letwin agreed: "What we need is effective long-term reform which puts the police back on our streets and reclaims those streets for the honest citizen throughout Britain."  While some RTS activists may feel rather flattered that their cause has been co-opted by Blunkett and Letwin, today's doughty answer to Batman and Robin, many more, to judge by the website, may feel that no coalition - even one as participatory as their own - is big enough to embrace both the shadow cabinet and the situationists.  As it is unlikely that the anarchists have bothered to copyright their slogan, their options are limited. Do they share it with the home secretary? Or should they take direct action to get it back?  The most constructive way forward may be some sort of slogan swap, whereby, in exchange for RTS the direct activists are offered some compensatory, New Labour slogan. While Blunkett could spend the next four years attempting to organise a street party, the direct activists would select from such missions as "Education, Education, Education", or "Tough on Crime, Tough on the Causes of Crime". Or "Things Can Only Get Better".  And who knows, in the hands of a principled and efficient body such as Reclaim The Streets, maybe they really will.