Day three, and already the campaign seems empty without her. Where is Cherie? How's her hair looking? What's she knitting these days? At this point in the election, last time round, the prime minister's wife had already guest-edited Prima, offered some choice glimpses of the Blairs' domestic arrangements, and appointed an adviser for the campaign. Although Cherie's metamorphosis from Queen's Counsel to Keen Knitter did not meet with universal acclaim, there was no denying its entertainment value. Besides, her supporters said, what choice did she have? "The truth is that the spouse of a political leader can't slip silently into the shadows these day - it isn't possible," wrote Yvette Cooper, who was then a Labour candidate and is now a pregnant junior minister with special responsibility for pregnant women. Wives, Cooper declared, are "the quickest way of proving humanity ... Keep that spouse under wraps, on the other hand, and people become suspicious, curious and fascinated." The repackaging of Mrs Blair was absurd, but with so few women in the 1997 shadow cabinet, it didn't do New Labour any harm to have her glued to Tony, just as it can now only help the Conservatives to have their customary female figurehead, Ann Widdecombe, eclipsed by the more conventionally alluring image of Ffion Hague. Mrs Hague has duly taken leave from work and on day one, when William toted his soapbox to Watford, she was already at his side: the side, that is, not already bagged by Sebastian Coe. Together the three snuggled into the back seat of the campaign car, for all the world like Jules, Jim and whatsername, except that in the Tory remake Hague is the one sitting in the middle and   Ffion never gets to speak.  Meanwhile Tony Blair was squiring David Blunkett into St Olave's. Mrs Blair was in the high court, defending ICI against the claim of 460 of its former workers that they were diddled out of earnings. While a reluctance to feign interest in knitting patterns would be understandable in another political spouse, coming from Mrs Blair, it is puzzling. In the last four years she has hardly been a reluctant consort, indeed her capacity for public hand-holding and adoring glances is unrivalled in the free world. Her actions have been consistently beyond the call of duty. She didn't need to cuddle Humphrey the tomcat, for example. Nor get togged up in the Hinduja's sari.  If the arrival of a fourth child barely dented Mrs Blair's public schedule, why has she now, when her presence would be such a promotional asset, buried herself in the high court for 14 weeks? The prosaic explanation is that the case was scheduled a year ago, when the election was planned for May 3 (in which case lucky old ICI knew the date before any of us). Couldn't she just pull out? Not,   it is pointed out, when the case is likely to make her around £300,000. In any case, this election is different from the last one: Labour can only win. Why should Mrs Blair subsidise victory?  Well, no reason, except that without her around, the Labour campaign is more likely to be exposed as extraordinarily, carelessly, culpably bereft of senior women. What happened? In 1997, remember, so many Labour women arrived in Westminster that Blair's publicists were able to spread them all around him like a swirly carpet. Inevitably, not    all of them rejoiced in their new role. Some found the hours inconvenient while others couldn't understand why the place wasn't keener on breastfeeding. Wasn't it meant to be the Mother of Parliaments? Many more others must have contemplated the elevation of Lord Falconer, to name just one of Blair's new-minted male grandees, and thought: why? Four years on, there are six women out of 24 cabinet members. Of those six, one is Baroness Jay. Mo Mowlam is leaving. Little of national significance is ever heard from the remaining four:   Margaret Beckett, Ann Taylor, Helen Liddell, and Clare Short.  This is not to say, of course, that the government does not care about women. It does, it really does. It cares so much it gave them a special women's unit, like a sort of victim support scheme, dedicated specially to their needs. It thinks so highly of them, that it put the poshest bird at its disposal, Violet Elizabeth Jay, in charge, who in turn brought out a special magazine, Voices, which was much enjoyed by her fellow subscribers to Good Housekeeping.  There can be no doubt that St Olave's all-girl congregation was one reason, along with its non-bog-standard "beacon" status and multi-cultural hymn singing habit, that this particular school was selected as the backdrop for Blair's election announcement. Instead of the carpet of recently elected babes, St Olave's offered aisle upon aisle of fresh - 100% female! - faces, not to mention skirts, long hair, high singing voices, the lot. Like every other aspect of this excruciating, self-defeating performance, the all-girl audience simply reminded you of the unappealing reality behind Blair's effusions: in this case, the fact that New Labour is, everywhere it counts, in cronydom as in cabinet, all boys. Moreover, it will be even more boyish after the election, which is likely to be the first election for 20 years to return fewer women than before. Despite its alleged eagerness to attract female voters, Labour is embarking on a campaign which already feels even more male-dominated than the last one.  Discussing prime minister's questions on the Today programme yesterday, James Naughtie mentioned Hague's skill in "throwing punches". Marr responded that it might be a "pretty gladiatorial contest". If these parliamentary skirmishes are, in practice, usually more reminiscent of Richmal Crompton than Ridley Scott, the broadcasters' reflexive allusions to male pugilism are understandable. Ten years after Mrs Thatcher was chucked out, men seem to be all we've got. Forget that talking-vagina show, this campaign is going to be the Penis Monologues. <B>Robin's lovely gift to Ronnie - a passport</B> Equestrian, raconteur, ladies' man - Robin Cook has many fine qualities but, until this week, few of us would have added a supreme capacity for forgiveness to the list. Yet how else to interpret his intervention, on behalf of the Sun newspaper, in getting a passport for the elderly criminal, Ronald Biggs?  In the past, the Sun has alluded to Cook as, among other things, a "strutting bantam", "a pygmy", a "liar", "a national embarrassment", "first among second-raters" and "a laughing stock". His    conduct is variously described as "lamentable", "preposterous", "brainwashed" and "ridiculous". And yet it was to the foreign secretary that the Sun's editor, David Yelland, turned, with a cry of "Get hold of Robin Cook", when their thief's lack of a passport threw the whole Biggs operation into jeopardy.  After 20 minutes, the paper boasts, "the foreign secretary had called his man in Rio and things started to move". An act of superhuman generosity on Cook's part, and one without which Biggs's repatriation could never have been achieved. How ungrateful then, that the paper did not think to mention Cook's name alongside those of "dad of two" John Askill, and "father of one" Mike Sullivan - to mention just two of its "Boys in Brazil", whose names, the paper proclaims, "will forever shine. This is the stuff of which legends are made - for they are the boys who brought back Ronnie Biggs".  What about Robin Cook! Let this column instead pay tribute to dad of two, the foreign secretary, who turns out to be a Sun man through and through. May his name forever shine.