The battle for the Tory leadership caught fire yesterday. Boris Johnson rescued a woman who was being mugged by three hoodies with an iron bar! It was fantastically brave, and hardly his fault that they turned out to be 12-year-old girls. How could he know? They were hoodies. Meanwhile, David Cameron had to swallow hard and announce that there would be no Tory referendum on the Lisbon treaty, on the grounds that it has already been ratified. "We could not make the treaty magically disappear, any more than we could hold a referendum to stop the sun rising in the morning," he said, a refreshing example of a politician admitting that there are things he cannot do. The decision is obviously humiliating and deeply unpopular with around half the Tories. So Mr Cameron did what all Tory leaders do when the party is falling to bits. He did a Churchill impression. "Never again!" he said, several times, pledging that these stirring words would appear "on leaflets". Of course Churchill did not have the advantage of modern technology, specifically Twitter. Instead of having to sit by crackly Bakelite radios, the British people could have read their mobile phones. "Hi! How's it hanging? Gonna fight, all over the shop. Surrender? LOL!" he would have written. Mr Cameron went on to promise that he would do all manner of ferocious things to put the EU in its place. There would be a "referendum lock". There would be opt-outs, guarantees and the abolition of "ratchet laws". He was beginning to resemble a giant squid squirting ink to cover its retreat. At the same time, he said, he would be patient, firm and respectful. They would not rush into a "massive Euro bust-up", as Churchill never described the second world war. In short, we cynical hacks assumed, he would  create a lot of noise, make umpteen demands, and then when the other 26 member states laughed in his face, he would go away quietly. And mug Boris Johnson. Back in the Commons, it looked as if MPs had finally got it about expenses. We didn't realise at first, though. The Speaker, John Bercow, announced the name of the chairman of the body that will rule on MPs' expenses. "Professor Sir Ian Kennedy, the chair-designate, will be paid a maximum of £100,000 a year," he said. MPs can be a little slow on the uptake, and it took them a moment to work out what this meant. A hundred grand! Why, that was half as much again as they earned! Then a great roaring noise, a thunderous blend of mockery and rage, rose from the benches on all sides. It was like Krakatoa clearing its throat. The person who will decide how much money they get will be getting more money than them! (This is of course true of almost every one of us in paid employment, but MPs don't see it like that.) However, various party grandees made it plain that they accepted all Sir Christopher Kelly's decisions, and would not be picking the ones they liked from the  la carte. As David Heath for the Lib Dems said: "The terms of our contract have changed. Those who don't like it have a choice – they need not reapply.