One reason MPs love prime minister's questions is that it is so interactive. For instance, they have noises which they can make when certain members rise to their feet. It's a bit like Peter and the Wolf, in which each character is greeted by a different tune from a different instrument. For Daniel Kawczynski, the immensely tall Tory MP for Shrewsbury, the sound is a sort of werewolf howl. I don't know why, except that Kawczynski does look rather like the butler from the Addams Family and wears a suit that looks as if it once belonged to a normal-sized person who was run over by a steamroller. Anyhow, he was on the wrong end of a beautifully timed "Yowwww!" today. When Nick Clegg stands up he gets cries of "Oh, no!" from the Tories. This is supposed to indicate a sort of horrified boredom, which is unfair, since Clegg often makes excellent points. Though it would help if his voice was half an octave lower, so that he sounded less like an annoyingly precocious schoolboy. The Tories really go for Bob Spink, the MP for Castle Point, who defected from them to Ukip. He is met with a sort of furious, bubbling yelp of scorn with cries of "Traitor!" and "Turncoat!" And someone who can expect future tormenting is Chris Ruane, Labour MP for Vale of Clwyd. He began by saying – no, shouting – "Prime minister! We live in dangerous times!" The Tories loved this, and you can't blame them, especially as this March of History intro turned into an entirely predictable question about the weirdos, loonies and Waffen SS-fans whom the Tories have cosied up to in the European parliament. It was a weedy question heralded by a bombastic prelude, and if it wasn't either a plant by the whips, or a subtle joke by Ruane, then he has no excuse. The bullies have marked him down for the future. As for David Cameron, the Labour backbenchers, who have little enough to make them happy these days, like to pick up the prissy, faintly camp style he occasionally lets slip. Today he said of Gordon Brown, "I'm not going to let him get away with that!" in the manner of a men's fashion expert saying that yellow cravat simply would not go with the navy houndstooth jacket, and they all went "Whoooo!" What intrigues me is Cameron's Zelig-like quality. Just as he admired Tony Blair (if you analyse his opposition to Blair becoming president of Europe, it is because he fears he would do the job too well), so he secretly wants to be like Gordon Brown. As he did last week, the prime minister has abandoned rational debate for the use of the word "Wrong!", which is designed to bring all argument to a close. Today he deployed it 13 times. Cameron began by jeering about the government's change of mind over TA funding. The prime minister offered a convoluted reply. "Honestly!" said the Tory leader, "this prime minister can't even give a straightforward reply when he's performing a U-turn!" Er, well, no. Anyhow, Cameron went on to use the word "wrong" nine times – "the wrong policy informed by the wrong values!" Unconscious imitation is the sincerest form of unwitting flattery.