Parliament rarely gets it right. On the television there were shots of crowds bursting through police lines in protest against Nick Griffin of the BNP appearing on Question Time. The great British tradition of violence, whether for political reasons or to demonstrate support for a football club, was being maintained. Some 25 people were alleged to have broken through police lines and got into TV Centre, including Mr Griffin himself. But TV Centre is always full of loonies, many of them appearing on Strictly Come Dancing, in which several people have been accused of racism. Back in the Commons they were arguing about more rarified matters. The public administration committee was talking to people who had never been elected but were ministers none the less. They included persons of terrific knowledge and accomplishment, plus Lord Adonis. The committee kicked off by asking the secretary of state for transport about his achievements. He told them. They were manifold. He had been an academic, a journalist, a policy adviser, a local councillor, and presumably a lord high everything else. Nothing he said implied that he had ever known anything about transport. The committee's chairman, the admirable Tony Wright, who, we are sorry to learn, is about to leave the Commons, gently pointed out that as a policy adviser on education he had not been universally loved. While education secretary, David Blunkett had asked: "What is the point of my being here? Who is the bloody education secretary, me or Andrew Adonis?" Estelle Morris, who had a short and unhappy period in the same job, said: "Sometimes Andrew Adonis is plain wrong. I am elected. He is not elected." Admiral West, who used to be first sea lord, and is now the minister for tackling terrorism, was more impressive. A lot more impressive. He pointed out that he might not be political – he wasn't even a  member of the Labour party – but he did have long experience, back from the days when terrorists were called "freedom fighters". In other words, he had done a real job. Several real jobs. They asked him what he felt about Richard Dannatt, the former chief of general staff who says he will join the Tory party as a minister if and when they win the election. "If they make him a minister of defence, that is a terrible error," said Lord West. The last military man to be appointed to the government was Lord Alexander of Tunis, back in 1951. "It is an error and a mistake, and I think he will regret it."  You might argue that Lord West did much the same thing, though with a long gap before joining the government, which he had found intriguing. "Sometimes in the House of Lords you are questioned by an expert, perhaps the world expert on the subject, and you can't say 'yah, boo, sucks, you lot were rubbish last time' – you have to answer the question." Which was not always easy. "I didn't expect to have to answer questions about female genital mutilation and drug testing for gorillas. It is good for my brain. I think I have become a better person because of it.