The prime minister has a new catchphrase to go with "prudence" and his exciting new coining from Tuesday, "the bottom-up process". It is the single word "wrong". This is perfect, being convenient, short, and able to prevent any argued reply. To "you're wrong!" the only possible riposte is "no, I'm not". He used the word 12 times yesterday, and I may have missed a few. To set the scene: the Tories arrived at prime minister's questions in high good humour, since they had read – or more likely heard about – the Guardian front page that suggested they might have a 100-seat majority at the election. Some had noticed the polls starting to slip, and were getting a shade antsy. Their merry mood was expressed by cries of "bye-bye!" when the prime minister spoke. David Cameron had decided to blame the threatened postal strike on the prime minister, and his failure to push through the bill to part-privatise Royal Mail. Why had the prime minister allowed "this appalling display of weakness"? Mr Brown tried to pretend that the reason he had not pressed the bill was that no commercial buyer had been found. This obvious fabrication, not so much a porkie pie as a whole roast hog on a spit, was like a bottle of chilled champagne to the Tories. They produced a mighty burp, a sort of great, cynical, volcanic "Whaaa?" noise designed to indicate their contempt. It was complete nonsense, said the Tory leader. He had dropped the bill because his backbenchers wouldn't support it. Why could he not admit it? The row ground on. Mr Brown tried to imply that the Tories wanted the strike to go ahead. Perhaps, secretly, they do. Mr Cameron groaned about another six months under a prime minister who couldn't give a straight answer and who can't even decide what kind of biscuits he likes. This is where Mr Brown deployed his weapon. The Tories were wrong – on everything: wrong on Northern Rock, wrong on mortgages, wrong … the list of wrongs went on and on. Later Nick Clegg complained that the banks were paying "eye-watering bonuses" while the taxpayers who had bailed them out were losing their jobs. Mr Brown's reply: "He is wrong on both counts, and wrong again." As for the assumption that the government would lose money, that was "wrong". And satisfied, at least with himself, he sat down. In Westminster Hall, parliament's mini-chamber, MPs had finally found, to their relief, an institution whose reputation was lower even than their own: to wit, the legal firm of Carter-Ruck, which tried to use an injunction to prevent the Guardian from reporting a parliamentary question about toxic waste pollution. Paul Farrelly warned that we were in danger of having "not the rule of law, but the rule of lawyers". Parliamentary privilege should not be eaten away by firms such as Carter-Ruck, which had received a bloody nose. Denis MacShane went further. In the past the partners in Carter-Ruck would have been dragged before the house to apologise, and imprisoned if necessary. Since this is precisely what many voters would like to see happen to many MPs, it must have been a very satisfying moment.