The three party leaders appeared before a committee of MPs today to explain how they would get more minorities into parliament. Originally they were supposed to appear together, but Gordon Brown said he wanted them to be interviewed separately. Which was lucky. If it had been anything like prime minister's questions we would have had nothing but duelling statistics. "Under us, we have had an 8.7% rise in the number of disabled people standing as candidates!" "Does the rt hon member not realise he is speaking utter garbage? Unlike the other parties, we have a 17.9 increase in black and Asian women ..." Instead we got a feast of jargon. David Cameron created a new word. He said that men were at an advantage in selection meetings. "We have to de-macho the process," he said, and not one committee eyelid was batted. Actually, "de-macho" sounds like a new, trendy coffee. "I'll have a skinny de-macho grande with extra shot, please." "Coming up! That'll be £7.99." All three were tripping over their bootlaces in an effort to prove how inclusive they wanted to be. The present imbalance, said the Tory leader, was "bad for women, bad for ethnic minorities, and also bad for politics. I want the conversation we have in the Conservative party and parliament to be like the conversation in the rest of the country." I assume that he meant not "conversation", but "issues of general importance to people". Otherwise it would make the Commons a pretty boring place. "Look, it's bloody raining again. Call this a summer?" Or, "that Tory bloke, wossname, Cameron is it? Eyes too close together if you ask me." Gordon Brown kicked off by reading a statement that sounded as if it had been carved rather than written. "The greatest of injustices demands the boldest action," he declared. He wanted more women, black and Asian people, disabled folk, and "LGBT". This is not a new phrase, but I hadn't realised how quickly it has become political shorthand. (It means lesbian, gay, bisexual and transsexual). It too sounds like something you might order. "Gimme one of those lettuce, gherkin, bacon and tomato rolls." "One LGBT, you want mayo?" It tripped off the prime minister's tongue as easily as his other catchphrases, such as "prudence" and "Raith Rovers nil". Mr Cameron promised there would be all-women shortlists in the Tory party. Mr Brown seemed less definite: "What we are doing is not having the top-down enforcement of rules, but a bottom-up process." He was very fond of that phrase and kept repeating it. "Bottom-up in the long run is going to make a huge difference," he declared, as if getting more women into parliament was the political equivalent of a suppository. Parmjit Dhanda, a Labour MP, pointed out that Tony Blair had two ethnic minority cabinet members. "There are not now, but there are four white Scottish men," he said. Mr Brown's eyes hooded. As a white Scottish man he may well feel there aren't enough of them in the cabinet. He grumped about Lady Scotland, "the first black attorney general, and a very successful one at that". Which is very much a matter of opinion. Nick Clegg got angry, about parliament. "This place reeks of the 19th century!" he said. "We have a shooting gallery but no creche!" At least the standard of debate would probably be higher in the creche.