That story in the Guardian about the researchers who persuaded tabloid papers to run fake  stories about celebrities struck a chord with me. But, I wondered, why did they think it was so new? It's been going on here at the Commons for ages. For example, somebody rang the papers to say that Gordon Brown was going to crack down on the banks, to make them stop paying ridiculous bonuses and start lending money to businesses. It should have been easy to check that the story was nonsense, but nobody did. It was picked up and ran in papers all over the country. Another prankster tried to plant the story that Harriet Harman was committed to cleaning up the parliamentary expenses scandal. If editors had shown the faintest interest in confirming their facts, they'd have known that this was just another crazy invention! As was proved yesterday. MPs had several sessions in the morning, including around 80 minutes discussing their own affairs. They seemed anxious to look at almost anything but. They considered whether deconsecrated churches could be turned into lap-dancing clubs. Sir Stuart Bell, who speaks for the church commissioners, deployed Ezekiel in support of the church's decision to concrete over 300 acres of fine agricultural land in Sussex, against the presumed wishes of the archbishop of Canterbury, who wants us to be self-sufficient in food. "They shall keep my laws and statutes," Sir Stuart said, quoting God. "We propose to keep our laws and statutes." Sir Stuart is fortunate, in that you can find something in the Bible to support anything, including slavery and stoning people to death for wearing the wrong clothes. There was a brief mention of the way in which the prime minister prefers to make policy announcements anywhere except the House of Commons. This week he had left it up to Liam Byrne, number two at the Treasury, to describe his fire sale of national assets. "So we got, not the organ grinder, not the monkey, but the monkey's assistant!" said David Heath, to loud applause. It was 92 minutes before Douglas Hogg uncoiled himself and declared that Sir Thomas Legg's decision to rewrite the rules and demand money back from MPs was "a denial of natural justice" and would be overthrown by the courts. He then slumped, eyes hooded, half in his seat, half falling towards the floor – looking rather like a large fish that has just choked to death in a filthy moat. The place fell very quiet. Harriet Harman, leader of the house, umm-ed and ahh-ed. She recognised that the system had become discredited. We needed a new, independent system. Clearly people had to fork out if they had double-claimed, or received the capital – as opposed to the interest – on a mortgage. But, she went on, it all depended on the rules and standards that obtained at the time. "To do anything else would be arbitrary." And MPs had three weeks to appeal. So it's all up in the air again. Making us think she was really going to crush the scandal was just another cruel spoof.