David Cameron has finally turned into Tony Blair. He's been working on it for years, and now it's happened. Oh, he attacked him all right – he has to – but it was brief, and some of us remember that this was the man who led a standing ovation when Blair walked out of the Commons for the last time. We had the same breathless Blair build-up, with offstage voices and throbbing music, as if we were at the launch of a mid-size family car. There was the video appearance by Bono, obligatory for all party conferences, sporting extraordinary eyewear that may have been designer welding goggles. There was the same somewhat limp delivery – Blair was always happier on a sofa than at a rostrum. If Barack Obama tried to get his audiences "fired up, ready to go!" Blair and Cameron had them calm down, ready to catch the train home. There were the same vague wish lists that didn't amount to promises. Whereas Blair conveyed a fuzzy, feelgood mood through verb-free sentences, Cameron uses the formula: "I see a country where … [fill in benign aspiration without either a pledge that it will happen or the means by which it might]." There were the almost subliminal pop culture references. "There aren't many reasons to be cheerful" (Ian Dury and the Blockheads). "But there are reasons to believe" (Rod Stewart). "If we come together (the Beatles), if we work together (Canned Heat)." This was rhetoric for people who still just remember when music was records, not downloads. Actually, you could tell how the speech was going by watching the shadow cabinet, who were seated behind him and able to admire his back. The ones immediately behind him appeared on the giant screens, so we could get a good view of the expressions on their enormous faces. Andrew Lansley looked hard and determined. Chris Grayling and Liam Fox looked puzzled. Ken Clarke, however, looked bored. The oyster eyes were narrowed, and at one point he did an impression of a man having a short kip. And who can blame him? He must have heard dozens of these speeches, and you could tell that he would rather have been at Ronnie Scott's, in a hide by some bird-festooned fen, propping up a bar – just about anywhere other than where he was. At the big clap-lines – whenever the leader mentioned poverty the claque at the front rose to lead a mini-standing ovationette – the other ministers in waiting would clap energetically. Clarke would pause, then two hands would make brief and flappy contact. It was like two tired plaice engaged in foreplay. This was, perhaps, slightly surprising, since Cameron had cast himself as the good cop of the conference. The bad cop had been George Osborne, listing all the cuts he would make, and the misery of living in post-crash Britain. Cameron let himself describe the Elysium we will all live in once the Tories have set the economy to rights. But he did seem a little tired, unable perhaps to excite himself and so thrill the conference. Perhaps the mood was set by the one personal reference – to the death of his son. "It's like the world has stopped turning and the clocks have stopped ticking ... you think about what you believe and what sustains you." Hard to rouse rabbles after that. Finally it was over, and he was joined on the platform by his wife, Samantha. The music struck up I'm a Believer, including the lines: "What's the use in trying? All you get is pain, when I needed sunshine I got rain ..." Not quite the message the speech had been trying to convey, but you can't blame him if it's what he thinks and fears he might be in for.