Heavens, George Osborne was grim. As grim as a gargoyle, craggy as a crag, jaw set in steel – even the famous smirk was well hidden behind the scowl. He stood in front of us as if on the deck of the Lusitania, and tried to stare the whole conference down. There were no preliminaries, no little jokes, no soft words to prepare us for the onslaught. He leapt straight in like a very angry Olympic diver: "We know what the task is!" he barked. And then we were off, hurtling down the Highway of Hopelessness, stopping off at the Welcome Break of Woe, before checking into Misery Motel. Deepest recession since the war. Greatest government borrowing in history. Profligacy! Fantasy! Lies! Sinking in a sea of debt! Clearly, the toughest possible action was required. So before we knew it, he was announcing the vicious changes we would need. Savage increases in the retirement pension. Slashing pay rises for the poorest public sector workers. Watch out for ferocious raised spending on the NHS! Reduced inheritance tax (delayed). Nobody would be spared his generosity. We were all in this together. It was a cross between Santa Claus: The Movie and Saw VI. It did seem rather odd. Obviously there would be a pay freeze for most public sector workers, and a cut in MPs' pensions, which will save the average family pennies a year. Quangos would be reduced – that's an old Tory plan, and I'll bet they set up a quango to decide which quangos should be culled – and there would be efficiency savings. There always are. They just never happen. The Osborne neutron bomb will explode above Whitehall, destroying thousands of jobs within, but leaving the buildings intact, to be turned into executive maisonettes. Oh, and the unemployment problem will be solved by turning the entire nation into bed-blockers. We will all work a year longer before we retire or pop off the perch, whichever comes sooner – or possibly later, since the horrendous situation Labour has bequeathed means that we may need to continue working after death. But no politician can feed the public a diet of undiluted misery, and the promise of goodies to come did conflict, rather bafflingly, with the overlying message of doom. "Give it to me straight, doc." "I am afraid it's bad news. You are very ill indeed. I have never had anyone as sick as you in my surgery. So take two paracetamol and call me in the morning. If you wake up." In the afternoon, we heard from Ken Clarke, the shadow business secretary. He reminded us how long he has been around, from the days when Tory conferences were even more bonkers than they are today. He called for questions from the floor. Nobody responded. "In my day," he said ruefully, "there would have been a rush of rather peculiar-looking people." There is still a plentiful supply of peculiar-looking people, but for some reason they aren't rushing up. His eyes have become more oyster-like, so he increasingly resembles the late Willie Whitelaw, which is apt since it was Willie's job to find a courteous form of words to tell Margaret Thatcher that what she proposed was barking. No doubt he will have a similar task with the coming leadership. Or as he put it: "Cameron and Osborne are decent, highly intelligent, decent young politicians … " Perhaps it wasn't meant to sound incredibly patronising, but it did. A fine moment.