The Tories have added a shopping mall to their conference. Behind the main hall you can find Harvey Nichols, M&amp;S, Crombie, Austin Reed, a place where you can be measured for a suit, a stall selling carpeting, even a stand where you may buy Conservative Conference 2009 Christmas tree baubles, three for £10. How festive can you get? It's for a home where you might expect a Conservative policy review in your stocking, or a Dominic Grieve action doll. Most British airports these days are just retail opportunities with a few planes waiting around outside; in the same way, it must be infuriating if you pop along to order some carpet for the front room and can't hear yourself think because of the politicians droning on next door. This air of surreal, dreamlike oddness extends to the conference itself. Labour calls its chairmen "chair" even when they're men. But the Tories' chair for the week, Emma Pidding, is addressed as "chairman", though she is clearly a woman. The conference chairman is different from the party chair, who is male, specifically Eric Pickles, built on the lines of a gigantic gherkin, and who addressed us as "my dear chums", which made him seem a bit too much like a creepy scoutmaster for my tastes. His main task seemed to be to depress the mood. "Be under no illusion, the general election is not in the bag. We still have a mountain to climb." Having sprayed them with gloom, he left them to Oliver Letwin, who ought to be in that new film, The Invention of Lying, because he can't. He gave a long and dry account of new Tory policies. When one created a faint stir in the audience, he pleaded: "You're not supposed to clap. This presentation is supposed to be so factual, there is not a single clap-line in it. Sorry." I'd love to have heard him at the Winter Palace: "Look, the tsar is doing a not bad job under quite difficult circumstances …" Francis Maude was slightly more exciting. He announced a magnificently bizarre plan to have the public monitor government spending through the internet: "We shall unleash an army of armchair auditors who will crawl all over the government's accounts!" He made them sound like the Wehrmacht, crawling all over Poland, only in comfy recliners instead of tanks. And what will happen when this unleashed army has finished its crawling operations? Will they be sent into Afghanistan with too few Parker-Knolls and inadequate slippers?  Boris Johnson cheered them up a bit, with a speech of which large parts were in English, as opposed to Latin. They liked his attack on Harriet Harman for driving away from the scene of an accident. "It is up to us to sweep up the crushed indicator lights of a classic Labour car crash!" But what really got them going was his pledge to reintroduce Routemaster buses and to restore the river Thames to the London tube map. Much more exciting than the national debt. In the afternoon members of the shadow cabinet stood in line and made little speeches. They looked like the defendants at a Soviet show trial, and not much perkier. David Cameron then made a surprise appearance. He also told them how horribly difficult it would be to win the election. Thus thoroughly depressed, they could only cheer themselves up with some marrons glacs from Harvey Nicks, £4.95.