Brown came on to a storming ovation, which must have been a relief. But then the Labour conference loves Sarah, and she loves Gordon. "I know he's not a saint," she said, but then revealed that is exactly what he is. "He's messy, he's noisy … but he wakes up every morning and goes to bed every evening, thinking about the things that matter … intense, serious and gentle … always takes the time for people … that's why I love him as much as I do … my husband, my hero!" I tried to imagine Denis Thatcher saying something along those lines, but my synapses began to make popping noises. "It can only go downhill from now," said my neighbour as the paragon himself bounded on to the stage. In fact it started off well, with a highly selective list of Labour's "achievements", some real enough, others rather dodgy, a few extremely dubious. But then we had just been shown a video in which the party tried to claim credit for JK Rowling's success. It ended with a mad flight into the vague and intangible. "Dream not small dreams, because they cannot change the world," he said, misquoting Goethe. "Dream big dreams, and watch our country soar!" Good lord, how big do our dreams have to be? I resolved to start dreaming enormous dreams, economy-sized dreams, dreams so bloody huge they'll need a forklift truck to get me out of bed. "Never, never stop believing!" he raved. "Now is not the time to give in, but to reach inside ourselves for the strength of our convictions!" ("Doctor, I have these terrible stomach pains." "Hmm, looks as if you have the strength of your convictions blocking the lower intestine. We must operate. July 2011 good for you?") But there was a dreamlike quality to the whole speech. The gist of it was, that after nearly 13 years, Labour wants a crack at government. Having constructed a short, sanitised version of a past that did happen, he launched into a future that probably never will: whimpering bankers flee from the wrath of the British people, grateful old folk get free care at home, sinister-sounding "action squads" will sort out troublemakers on problem estates, no more hereditary peers, a plebiscite on PR, green jobs for green people, as he almost said, and a weird Victorian notion of an institution for fallen women – a barracks for single teenage mothers. There will be "family intervention projects" for the most "chaotic" families. "Blimey, it's the fip-man at the door. Put that spliff out and get the dog off the baby's tea."  And asbos will be strictly enforced, no doubt by the same action squads that will stop binge drinking and bankers' bonuses. But as the late Linda Smith said: "Don't knock asbos – for some of these kids it's the only qualification they've got." The whole fantasy, that Labour has another five years in office to do all the things it never quite got round to in the last 13, pleased the conference mightily. They're going to dream massive buy-two-get-one-free dreams and reach deep inside themselves like the monster from Alien. They loved it. But I bumped into an MP for a now marginal seat. He was as gloomy as I've ever seen him. "Go back to your constituencies and prepare to be …" and then he described something very rude indeed.