It was a modern miracle, the scene we thought we would never see. The Labour party rose, not just to applaud Peter Mandelson but to cheer him, to whoop at him, to adore him. Tony Blair famously said that his project would not be complete until the party had learned to love Mandelson, and as he himself said today, "perhaps he set the bar a little too high". Not high enough, as it turns out. On this form he could have cleared 12ft without a pole. The same people who resented and mistrusted Mandy, who used to listen to his speeches in near silence, interrupted only by the occasional disgruntled noise like a frog coughing in a bucket, sat entranced and then inflamed. No matter that the speech was bonkers. The business secretary was by turns coy, kittenish, camp and crazed. Occasionally his voice rose to a squeak, his facial expressions were frankly weird, and now and again he slowed alarmingly as if his carburettor had cut out. Half the time he was like one of those people who shout at strangers on buses; the other half he resembled a slightly creepy uncle reading a bedtime story. Sometimes he ranted; at other times his voice descended to a sinister murmur. But why did they love him? It may have been the jokes at his own expense. Normally we'd no more associate Peter Mandelson with self-deprecation than Victoria Beckham with quantum physics. False modesty is the only kind he knows. But today he produced humility with added welly. He talked about his shock and surprise when Gordon Brown asked him back, and his apprehension – "returning to the goldfish bowl of British politics – and all my fans in the media!" He reminded us of his two resignations. He admitted ignoring people's susceptibilities: "I made enemies, sometimes needlessly. I was sometimes too careless with the feelings or views of others. "But please accept this … I was in a hurry to return this party to where it should be, in government." So it was a politician's apology: "If I have a failing it is that I am too keen on our party winning." He raced on. He had an encomium for Brown, formerly his greatest political enemy. "The pull of coming back to serve THIS prime minister, our leader, Gordon Brown, who was GRIPPING this financial crisis …" (There is a theory that all speeches here are manufactured centrally, and it's true that the only approved formula for referring to the helmsman is as "Our Prime Minister, Gordon Brown", or OPMGB, as it may appear on the template.) He had, he said, been born into the Labour party. "It is in my blood, and in my bones," which made him sound like a mummy excavated from an ancient tomb. "I love this party, and those who work so hard for it – even if, at times, perhaps not everyone in it has loved me." But what they really liked was that for the first time someone offered them a sliver of hope. They were in the fight of their lives, and they were fighting as underdogs. "But if I can come back, we can come back." There was an awful lot of reference to himself, but then it is a topic he can speak of with passion. By the end he was yelling and shouting, raving at the Tories. Deep in his guts, he had known the result of every election before it happened, even 1992, when Labour unexpectedly lost. "But this time it is not cut and dried. This election is up for grabs!" No wonder they went berserk for him. Any kind of hope is preferable to despair, and a false dawn is better than no light at all.