Out on the Brighton seafront there was a terrific market, with music, dancing, food from around the world, colourful stalls – the strip packed with families enjoying themselves in the sun. Inside the conference there was air-conditioned gloom. No sunlight penetrates here. Labour members would love to imagine they have a chance of winning the next election, but they don't seem to believe it. They're like someone who owes money to violent gangsters and prays his premium bonds might turn up in time. Senior party members have a string of slogans which would inspire most people to thoughts of suicide, or at least a long sit-down in a darkened room. "We will not win every seat in the general election, but we will win many that people think we will not win," Gordon Brown told them, sending party workers on their way with a dirge in their hearts. "I think voters might set aside their dissatisfaction with our government and ask themselves a much more fundamental question: do they really, really trust the Tories?" asked Peter Hain. That translates as "voters might just have collective amnesia and forget how fed up they are." Try marching behind that banner. The strategy appears to be to behave as if Labour was already in opposition, raging against the Tories who are virtually in power. The applause was thin and sporadic, the sound of a discarded newspaper blowing down a pedestrian subway. The delegates sat there, gloomy but stoical, like travellers at Gatwick told of a further two hour delay. As a troupe of new candidates arrived on stage, the audience just gave up, and had to be told "keep clapping, there's lots more!" One man who did make an effort to coax out some life was Ed Miliband, the energy secretary. The test of the party, like the test of our country, came when we were up against adversity, he told them. He went into a raving encomium about someone who had always stood up for "homes, for jobs, for the savings of the hard-working people of Britain!" Who could he mean? It turned out to be Gordon Brown, who had snuck on to the platform without anyone noticing or, it seemed, caring. The problem was that Mr Miliband, jacketless, with his dark hair and shiny pink silk tie, looks much like the proprietor of an upmarket Indian restaurant. As he marched about the stage – rambling round the rostrum is very fashionable this year – shouting, I expected him to say, "and now you have finished your poppadoms, I insist you return the pickle tray! Those relishes are for the many, not the few!" He finished by yelling "let's stand up and fight for the Britain we believe in!" At this point the conference heard "stand up", woke from its collective torpor and gave him a stooping ovation – mostly, but not entirely, upright. Then they sank back. The session ended with Brown answering questions, or rather, saying what he wanted to say at length. It was not much of a grilling – rather as if Andy Murray were to send down a few foam rubber balls for biffing back. At least he was still awake at the end; I cannot vouch for his listeners.