Nick Clegg strode out on to the platform to make, once again, the most important speech of his life. Oh, well, can't win 'em all. He was in a dark suit with a shiny yellow tie, and looked as if he were about to hop up as the decoration on a wedding cake. Oh, it wasn't a bad speech. It aspired to the OK. At times it soared to heights of the tolerable. The audience was sometimes a little slow to respond, but they generally got there. But it was meant to greet a new political dawn in this country, in which the old, weary usages would be shredded and replaced by the new, the revolutionary and the cleansing. So why was it such a traditional party leader's speech of the type that could have been delivered more or less verbatim at any time, by any leader, over the last half century? Except for the bit about global warming. The speech was full of breaches of the law of reverse intention, which states that if the exact opposite of a statement is plainly nonsense, then it probably wasn't worth making in the first place. For example, "I want to change our country for good!" (I want to change our country for the worse.) Or, "I want to live in a country where prejudice, insularity and fear are conquered by the great British traditions of tolerance, pluralism and justice!" (I want to live in a country where liberalism, compassion and fairness are replaced by those great British traditions of prejudice, terror and xenophobia!) Then there are the embarrassing faux-populist jokes: "Labour is like the Big Brother house, locked away from reality, arguing about trivia – and like Big Brother they are about to be taken off the air!" There is the traditional false modesty. Leaders love to list their faults which turn out not to be faults at all. "Occasionally, I'm a bit too blunt in interviews – but at least you know I'm not spinning you a line," he said, which translates as "if I have a failing, it's that I'm sometimes too honest." There is the ersatz candour. "I'll be straight with you – there are no easy answers." This is a line you hear in speeches roughly as often as "the answer is simple!" There were the artful new cliches, such as his favourite, "progressive austerity", which meant cuts, but cuts "driven by generosity of spirit". Which will be a lot of comfort when you lose your job, or the local clinic closes. Then there are the glutinous and wildly improbable tributes to his colleagues. He mentioned Chris Huhne at the Home Office, demanding change, balked by technocrats. "He'll produce volumes of statistics showing he's right, and look sternly over his glasses until they cave in." (Somehow I don't think that the mandarins of Whitehall will give in so easily. It's not like Are You Being Served? in there. "Ooh, I was getting on so well, but then he gave me that really stern look over his glasses and I went all shivery!") 'Sarah Teather and Norman Baker, building Britain's infrastructure!" he declared, and one thought that they were perhaps the two least likely MPs to be found helping to widen the M6 bottlenecks. To be fair, there were moments at which he sounded as if he'd left the ancient template behind and the audience responded, as when he sadly accused Labour of betraying "the best hopes of a generation". But then we learned that the Lib Dems carry "the torch of progress now", and we were back once more in the past, borne back ceaselessly into the future.