The most moving moment in the Commons discussion of Afghanistan came after Gordon Brown had insisted, several times, that our troops there had all the manpower and kit they needed. They had, he said, better equipment than in 40 years. The Tory MP Ian Taylor mentioned softly that his own son was serving in the current operation there, Panther's Claw. "I profoundly hope that the prime minister is right," he said quietly, before moving on to another subject. It was a moment of reality in a strange and confused debate. MPs on both sides each accused the other of political point-scoring. They would make the accusation, then score a few points of their own, because that's the way politicians work. I make a forthright contribution to the debate, you score cheap political points, he makes an outrageous insinuation which will undermine the valiant work being done by our brave fighting men. Yet the Tories were surprisingly subdued. Having worked themselves up after the ghastly events of the weekend into a froth of outrage, they seemed to sink back. I suspect that they realise they'll face precisely the same problems when – as they assume – they take power in the next few months. No point in clambering up to the moral high ground to harangue everyone if you're going to have to roll straight back down again. It was the first question time appearance for Bob Ainsworth, the surprising choice as defence secretary, John Hutton having toppled himself during the great self-culling of ministers last month. Mr Ainsworth is from Coventry, and a former sheet metal worker, as was the former Speaker Michael Martin. He resembles a character from an Ealing comedy. He has a bottle-brush moustache and a slightly crumpled face. I was put in mind of Captain Mainwaring after falling on hard times. His accent swerves between northern and southern, so our troops might face a "hambush", because you cannot conduct a war from an "'elicopter". He was not dazzling, but he was occasionally effective: the Tories taunted that the government had suggested our troops could be out of Afghanistan "without a shot being fired". Mr Ainsworth replied drily: "I would not be putting 16 Air Assault Brigade in if I didn't think there might be a bit of trouble." He had been bobbing up and down, but at long last we heard from Sir Peter Tapsell, who, like the Old Faithful geyser in Yellowstone Park, erupts at irregular but predictable intervals. Sir Peter speaks at a speed which would have allowed William Caxton to have  his words set in type before he sat  down. "May I wemind the pwime minister [Sir Peter has a slight speech impediment] that ever since we went back into Afghanistan in 2003, I have warned that not even 300,000 troops would be sufficient …" It was a magnificent, superb, "ya, boo, told you so