The clean-break Speaker marched through the marble halls on his way to his date with destiny. Actually, calling out names and occasionally getting ratty will be the easiest part of John Bercow's job. The tough bit will be restoring parliament's reputation, and that'll take hard work behind the scenes, plus, if he has any sense, time in the TV studios, looking as sincere and committed as anyone can after a cup of BBC coffee. He is the third Speaker in a row to have reduced the flounces and furbelows of the Speaker's dress. It's been a long strip-tease, which could end with the Speaker in sweater and jeans around the end of this century. Yesterday, he was in a dark suit with lace-up shoes entirely lacking silver buckles, and for the first time round a Speaker's neck there was an ordinary necktie - in this case of a stripy blue pattern. But he was in a gown, so the effect was of an Oxford don who has suddenly realised it's time for dinner in hall and thrown something round his shoulders. At 2.29 a policeman in the lobby uttered the traditional cry of "Spe-eeeee-ker!", stretching two syllables out to 12. That's not been reduced. Neither has the Speaker's posse, a gang of officials including the Serjeant at Arms with the mace, a trainbearer, the Speaker's chaplain, a badge messenger and an unidentified aide. Quite why he needs a trainbearer when he has no train to bear, nor a chaplain for spiritual sustenance when he is Jewish, has not been explained. No doubt alternative work can be found for these people, possibly in call centres. The onlooking crowds, mainly Commons staff, broke into loud applause, which sounded genuine enough. Bercow is not the sort to have a humble servitor fired for not clapping. He arrived for health questions and emitted a particularly plummy "Order, order!" The first topic was testicular cancer. This is the point at which any new Speaker might have wondered if it was worth all that effort. Ann Keen, a junior minister, talked about that, plus skin cancer, prostate cancer, sexual malfunctioning and other topics that so terrify us men that we wouldn't dream of going to our doctors to discuss them.  The Speaker announced that questions and replies should be snappy. He wanted to dash through the order paper. That's going to be tough. Many back-benchers like the sound of their own voices, but some ministers are infatuated. Things got off to a reasonable start; even Michael Fabricant had some good news about cancer of men's bits - apparently it can be cured if tackled early enough. The only time that the Tories grew grumpy was when Stephen O'Brien accused the government of threatening healthcare by letting Labour members of the European parliament sign up to the working time directive, reducing doctors' hours. Andy Burnham, the new secretary of state, replied: "Mr Speaker, I don't want, at your first question time, to inject a note of political discord," and the Tories let out a collective growl and harrumph, like an old walrus that has caught a young sealion stealing his fish. For they believe that the very existence of Mr Bercow in the Speaker's chair is a sign of the purest political discord.  Things trundled on much as normal. Simon Hughes, the Lib Dem, was smartly shut up when he rambled through a question about mental health care. Mr Bercow wanted MPs to be pithy, yet constructively so. They should become pith-artists. Then he tried to protect Gordon Brown from a barrage of Tory jeers and booing - "the prime minister must be heard!" he declared - and when that didn't work, he just glowered, which did the trick. One thing he didn't do was reprove Mr Brown for revealing Harriet Harman's plans for reform of the house on BBC radio hours before she came to the house. Telling MPs first was an important part of the Bercow manifesto. We'll know he means more than casual dress and a few jokes if he really takes on the powerful.