The Commons chuntered on as usual yesterday, but there was only one thing on MPs' minds - the publication of their expenses. Or rather, the publication of large black splodges where their expenses claims used to be.  I had an American friend, a university teacher who aroused the wrath of J Edgar Hoover by saying he believed the FBI was a greater threat to the liberty of the American people than the Communist party. When he got his FBI files under the Freedom of Information Act, hundreds of whole pages had been blacked out, but were left in the two boxes of files anyway, just to show him. (A great deal of what could be read was a list of the licence plate numbers of cars seen outside his house). Even so, far more of the stuff they had on him was left intact than appears in the list of MPs' expenses published yesterday. The problem of the expenses seemed to hang over everything. For example, Andrew Robathan, the Tory MP for Blaby, asked how much it was costing the Church Commissioners to deal with bats. Robathan is keen on bats. As he told us, he loves seeing them flying, and he wants them to flourish. "But there is a serious issue about the damage that is being done by bats to beautiful old churches." He wanted a "holistic" approach to bats. Yet more jargon! What did he mean? Head massages, aromatherapy, acupuncture and osteopathy to treat the whole bat? No, he just wants them moved. "Bats do not have to live in belfries," he said. So that's it - a second home allowance for bats! No doubt with allowances for moat cleaning, tennis court repairs and wisteria removal. But then some MPs are deeply resentful about any move that might restrict them. David Heathcoat-Amory was opposed to the Parliamentary Standards Authority, yet another commission set up by Gordon Brown. It is true there are far too many of these bodies. I am sure that when Sarah Brown asks her husband what he wants for breakfast he tells her that he has set up a committee of inquiry into the future of morning foodstuffs, and that it will report within eight months.  On the other hand, Heathcoat-Amory had perhaps not chosen quite the right moment to protest against a new body that will check MPs' expenses. "Why do the government want to transfer [this task] to an external, unelected, unaccountable quango, which would turn the clock back several hundred years as regards the powers of this house - a move that would be heartily welcomed by King Charles I?" You have to be pretty desperate to call on King Charles - he's not going to crop up on Sky News supporting your case. The shadow leader of the House, Alan Duncan, then appealed for MPs to agree that the new Speaker would be chosen according to principle, and not from narrow party interests. This was a plea for nobody to vote for John Bercow, a Conservative who is loved by Labour and hated by Tories. "We can but hope!" groaned David Winnick, who clearly fears the worst.