Gordon Brown came up with a new constitutional principle yesterday: he can't hold an election because the wrong side might win. Naturally all prime ministers believe that, which is why, like Jim Callaghan and John Major, they often leave it to the last minute, desperately hoping the polls will turn round. But it's strange to hear it expressed so openly. Dictators use the same argument, though with more hope of success. Mr Brown appeared on television yesterday morning and was asked about an election. He sounded as if a poll would be an outrage. "Do you really want to see tomorrow, in the midst of the recession, while the government is dealing with this, the chaos of an election?" This notion that an election was the equivalent of a football riot, or the bull-running at Pamplona, was seized by David Cameron a few hours later. (At prime minister's questions, MPs waded through many treacly tributes to the Speaker, who it turns out was the kindest, wisest, finest chairman any legislature could hope to have. So why did they sack him?) The Tory leader leaped upon "chaos". "What on earth did he mean?" Gordon Brown replied that what would cause chaos would be if a Conservative government were elected. Now, that is clearly not what he meant in the morning. What he meant on the GMTV sofa was that he was busy sorting out MPs' expenses, tackling the problems of unemployment, greed-crazed bankers and deflation, and simply could not be doing with an election at the same time. Why, it was as if he were holding an urgent meeting with the chancellor and the governor, and his wife Sarah were to march in and tell him it was his turn to put the kids to bed. Anyhow, Cameron was delighted with the reply. "There we have it: the first admission that the prime minister thinks he is going to lose!" Brown's only reply was to say that the Tories would bring in public spending cuts. But if that's what the voters want, shouldn't they get it? The logic was that an election might bring about a change of government, that would lead to a change of policy, and then where would we be? Cameron pointed out that several countries, including India and the United States, had somehow contrived to hold elections in the midst of the crisis. "Is President Obama an agent of chaos?" he demanded. Brown replied with a long list of achievements, or rather what he hopes might be seen one day as achievements. If he's lucky.  Cameron replied again that he had called elections "chaos – I call them change. Why can't we have one?" He knows the answer. But it won't stop him asking the question. A few minutes later, Hazel Blears, Mrs Pepperpot, was in Salford, not resigning, even though Gordon Brown had called her carrying-on "totally unacceptable". "The people of Salford know me," she said, "they know the kind of person I am!" Well, they do now. She broke away saying, "I'll be late for the mayor-making, and that would be unforgivable!" As opposed, presumably, to the financial shenanigans, which are entirely forgivable.