The Speaker stood up to make his statement about MPs' expenses. The house was far from full – no doubt members were saving money by hitchhiking to London. Michael Martin began: "We face a catastrophic loss of public confidence in the entire democratic process. The public are enraged. At a time when millions are facing financial hardship, they see us sucking up their money like sweaty camels at an oasis. As the man who presided over this  mounting chaos, consistently failing to take appropriate action at the appropriate time, while claiming extremely  generous expenses myself, it is clear that my continued presence can only delay the task of cleaning out our  stables. I hereby tender my resignation." Did he say that? Of course he didn't! Instead he gave a performance that, to use today's fashionable word, was truly lamentable. Oh, he did say briefly that things have to change, and that MPs should stick to the spirit as well as the letter of the rules. But then he got on to what really bothered them: their (or our) money. The police had been called in. Why, the person who had leaked details of the expenses was perfectly capable of selling MPs' account numbers, signatures and passwords. The Commons commission would be looking into the whole matter, that night. Great. The whole statement lasted just about three minutes. As he was off his prepared script things started to go the shape of a seriously over-ripe pear. Kate Hoey, for instance, the Labour MP who has spoken strongly against the expenses-bashers, wanted to know why the Met were being called in when they had a huge job to do in London. It was clear the Daily Telegraph had been very discreet with private details. You would have thought she had questioned the Speaker's parentage. "Might not this be seen as a way of hiding …" she tried to say, but he shut her up. "I listen to the honourable lady often, when I turn on the TV at midnight and I hear her public utterances and pearls of wisdom on Sky News …" He added: "It is easy to say to the press, this should not happen, it's a wee bit more difficult when you don't have to give quotes to the Express – to the press, not the Express – and do nothing else. Some of us in this house have other responsibilities, not just talking to the press!" This kind of semi-coherent abuse is not what Speakers are supposed to do. Norman Baker, a Lib Dem, was next in line. He wanted the list of expenses claims to be published more quickly. "Another member who is keen to say to the press what the press wants to hear!" barked Mr Martin. He was losing it. You knew things were bad when he referred to Ann Widdecombe as "the right  honourable gentleman". A few minutes later he admitted "I know I may have been in a bit of a bad mood today …" Yurrss. Will he be eased out? Probably not. Gordon Brown will stay loyal to a fellow Labour Scot, and the Tories don't want a new Speaker chosen before they have a majority.