In his autobiography, Paddy Ashdown describes his Marines instructor demonstrating how to swallow a live frog for survival in the jungle. The schools secretary, Ed Balls, seems to have adopted the same technique for dealing with the Tories in the Westminster jungle, except that he swallows live words. It makes him hard to follow, especially when he is feeding at top speed. "Cosistecy" is "constituency"; "Woth-wum" is Rotherham (like Sir Peter Tapsell, Mr Balls has a slight speech impediment). "Bue-kwatic" seems to mean "bureaucratic", "evokbly" is "irrevocably", and "wegly" is "regularly". "Prater-zation" is "prioritisation". You half-expect to see the words come wriggling back up, like the frog. Anyhow, it proved a good defence. The Tories hardly touched him. They have it in for Mr Balls, partly because he is thought to be involved with No 10's black propaganda unit, partly because he has been accused of dancing away from responsibility for last year's Sats disaster. In a startling intervention last week - largely unnoticed because it came on the same day as the budget - Ken Boston, who used to be in charge of the exams authority, accused Mr Balls and his understrapper, Jim Knight, of "sexing up" evidence to discredit him and to deflect richly deserved blame from themselves. The Tories couldn't wait to get stuck in. But as usually happens they failed. It's true that you feel that most Tories couldn't hit, say, Peter Mandelson with green slime if they were sitting on his head. But the education ministers have the luck of the devil, and know it. A question came up about free school lunches, and Sharon Hodgson of Gateshead complained that her local authority had removed the chocolate from the flapjacks offered to children. "That takes the biscuit!" said Sir Patrick Cormack. It doesn't take a lot to get MPs laughing, and they did. Suddenly Mr Knight was reminiscing about a biscuit he had enjoyed over the weekend. "It had cranberries and macadamia nuts," he mused happily, and I thought: they really don't fear the Tories. Or possibly Mr Knight, whose majority is under 2,000, knows that this is his last year, and within a few months he will be able to devote his life to finding the perfect bickie. Michael Gove, the Tories' estimable spokesman, tried to land a few blows on ministers, but they had all the impact of an ageing Jaffa cake. Sats had been a "mission critical issue" he said, showing that he too was having trouble with the English language. How many times had ministers contacted Dr Boston? Oh, lots, they replied insouciantly, face-to-face, by phone, by email - and by way of smoke signals and messengers carrying cleft sticks, they almost added. So who was lying, Mr Gove asked - the minister or Dr Boston? Mr Knight almost laughed that one aside, and there we were. Ministers, unscathed, were able to troop off to the tea room for a hobnob over a HobNob.