Everything is going wrong for this government. It's what happens when control freaks lose control. Take MPs' expenses, which they are going to debate next week.  Gordon Brown realises it is now a huge issue of public confidence. So he has to seize control and do something now, this instant. On the other hand, the idea he's come up with is barking mad. The prime minister's difficulty is that MPs want the wonga. But they don't want the rest of us to realise that they're getting it. Which is why they are petrified about the plan to give them all a generous payment simply for turning up.  Nominally this is to cover the cost of a necessary extra home. But it looks exactly as if they are getting more moolah simply for doing the job they are already paid generously to do. Which is why Alan Duncan, shadow leader of the house, used business questions yesterday to harass Harriet Harman on the issue. Had she not felt under-appreciated that the prime minister had bypassed her with his "deeply weird" statement on YouTube? You'll recall that's the one where Mr Brown deployed that terrible smile - he looked like the walrus (or possibly the carpenter) addressing all those tasty oysters. Was it true, Mr Duncan demanded, that No 10 had warned that Labour MPs who didn't vote for his proposals would be deselected? And how could she possibly defend his "barmy" plan for automatic daily allowances? All that may sound a little serious for Mr Duncan, who is more in the Graham Norton school of parliamentary performers. So he went all camp and wished Ms Harman a happy St George's Day and hoped he wasn't too much of a dragon for this maiden in distress. Ms Harman didn't really have a reply. She mumbled about "interim changes", important to do something now, and so on and so on, for so long that she actually had to plead with the Speaker to shut her up, which is something I have never seen an MP do before.  As sarcastic Tories shouted "More, more!" she begged him to put her out of her misery. He didn't. She rambled miserably onwards. Finally she turned off to Shakespeare's birthday, like a runaway lorry heading into one of those sand bays on steep downhill roads.  The mention of Shakespeare got one of the more literate Tories quoting Macbeth: "Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow ... " She tried to shift to The Winter's Tale, but the Tory would not be deflected: "Creeps on this petty pace from day to day ... " She claimed that Autolycus had been talking about Mr Duncan when he described himself as "a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles". Eh? This was lunacy. Clearly she would say anything to avoid the subject of daily allowances. Finally she petered out, and the Lib Dems' David Heath got his chance to say that the whole plan - the parliamentary equivalent of bonuses for failed bankers - had been scribbled on the back of a fag packet. The other party leaders had been summoned to rubber-stamp it, and when they refused the PM had said he would go ahead anyway.  "He believes it will inspire the confidence of the British people. It will," he barked, "NOT