Day 466 of the economic crisis, depending on the date from which you start it. It has seeped into every corner of government. In the Lords they were discussing the threat of violence tomorrow and Thursday when the G20 summit comes to town. (These events are largely pointless, as everything is agreed before the leaders turn up. No world leader is going to rush into the plenary session and shout: "Lads! I've changed my mind! Gordon Brown is absolutely right!") Lord West of Spithead, the terrorism minister, was in fine form. He might have been back on the bridge of his ship as it ploughed through the furious waters of the South Atlantic in 1982. He thought the police would be well up to handling any rough stuff. Some people had been told, he said, to "dress down" so as not to attract the attention of demonstrators. "I have no intention of dressing down. I might even dress up," he said. I'd like to see the reaction of passing anarchists faced with the former first sea lord in his full rig. And anyone who has coped with Argentine Exocets isn't going to worry too much about some oik with half a brick and a dog on a piece of string.  Next they discussed how the government was going to fund the enormous public borrowing requirement. Lord Myners used the new strategy adopted by ministers, which is to use technical language which most parliamentarians don't understand. "That would be conflation of fiscal policy and monetary policy," he said at one point. As for the fact that a government bond auction had failed last week - why, if it hadn't failed, that would merely prove that the government had been offering too generous interest rates! We need good news at a time like this, and Lord Myners can always find some. Back in the Commons, Alistair Darling spoke about the Dunfermline Building Society problem. It does seem to have been rather badly run. Vince Cable discovered that they had lent &pound;10m to a company called Inhouse plc which was "loss-making, insolvent and had never filed any accounts".  But what struck me was how tiny were the sums involved. They had spent a piffling &pound;150m on "high risk, self-certified mortgages from American companies". These guys are amateur wastrels, compared with the professionals at RBS and HBOS. To give you an idea, it's like the difference between the tenner of taxpayers' money Jacqui Smith's husband spent on two porn films compared with the &pound;23,000 she claimed for living in her sister's spare room.  Various MPs from around the Dunfermline area complained that the government hadn't done more to rescue this grand old institution, which they made sound like a cross between the Stone of Scone and Edinburgh Castle. At least Stewart Hosie, the SNP treasury spokesman, didn't try to blame the English, as his party generally does. This was quite reasonable which you consider that it is largely Scots who have left us where we are today, with special mentions for Gordon Brown and Sir Fred Goodwin.