I'm not the only person who is made queasy by Red Nose Day. We're all in favour of raising money for the wretched of the earth, but the sight of those smug, hugely overpaid celebrities urging the rest of us to empty our pockets is condescending and even rather offensive. And by banging on about how a pound will buy a mosquito net, or a fiver will inoculate a whole village, it avoids even thinking about the root of the problem. Suppose Davina McCall were to start jumping round and shouting: "And that five million - five million pounds! - you've raised is going to pay for a team of recently retired SAS men to descend on Harare and seize Robert Mugabe! And clap him in jail! Yes, a big shout out to all of you for helping get rid of one of the continent's greatest tyrants! Now, in Equatorial Guinea, here's Lenny Henry!" Lenny is doing his coy grin. He is standing in front of a splendid palace, fringed by palm trees. "All right, right behind me [conspiratorial whisper] lives Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, and he is one terrible [voice goes squeaky] tyrant! He has a personal fortune estimated at one billion dollars, yet his people have no roads, education, health services or sanitation! Mosquito nets won't help them! But with your pledges and donations, we can send in a crack squad of paratroopers right here ..." Now that would be worth watching. • Why is the BBC so obsessed with keeping the Scots onside? Last Sunday, so far as 87% of the sports fans in the UK were concerned, overwhelmingly the biggest story of the day was the England rugby team's tremendous and unexpected victory over the French. So the BBC national 10 o'clock news led its sports section on a match in Glasgow between Rangers and Celtic - of great interest to many Scots, and of scant interest to the rest of us. Rangers and Celtic meet several times a year, and quite often one of them wins. Heroic defeats of France are a rarity. The BBC is rightly keen to be seen to be politically neutral; preserving the union is not one of its jobs. • Brung, brung! The phone rings. It is Barry Cryer, the nation's gagfinder-general. He observes that there seem to be a lot of parrot jokes about. "Woman goes into a pet shop and sees a gorgeous parrot, only &pound;20. The shopkeeper explains it's cheap because the parrot used to live in a brothel, and its language might be fruitier than most. But it's so beautiful that the woman buys it anyway. "She takes it home, and puts it in the sitting room. 'New premises,' squawks the parrot. 'Nice.' "The woman's two daughters walk in. 'New girls, too' says the parrot. 'Very nice!' "Then her husband arrives. 'Hello, Keith,' says the parrot." Barry says that it has to be Keith. "Names with a 'k' in them are funny." • Speaking of exotic tropical birds, a new book called Alien Invaders lands on my desk. It's by two authors unknown to me, Jacob Cartwright and Nick Jordan, and it's about foreign fauna and flora that have settled in this country. Muntjacs, for example, and the giant hogweed. Another is the ring-neck parakeet, which has certainly settled in our part of town. I counted nine in a tree in our garden the other day. Esher, a few miles away, is said to have a colony of 7,000. They are noisy and voracious, though undoubtedly very pretty. One theory is that they were brought to Shepperton film studios in south-west London to decorate the jungle in The African Queen, which was set in Burundi. But that was nearly 60 years ago. Escaped pets seems a more likely explanation. But it also raises an intriguing aspect of globalisation. There is a native population in the Philippines, but this has been sharply reduced by the birds being used as target practice by the military. Since we have too many, why don't we round ours up, and send them off to Manila for the army to train on? That would really help us export our way out of recession. • Reader Mark Santer sends in a small leaflet that arrived through his letter-box "with the usual crop of flyers for pizzas, taxis and home improvements". It is headed "Mr Abodol. The most righteous and truthful African. Spiritual healer and clairvoyant. I can help you to solve all your problems in your life. I can bring happiness into your life. I can remove black magic, bad luck and witchcraft, impotency from your life. Mr Abodol can also advice [sic] you in all your problems which prove to be difficult, business difficulties, love, marriage or relations problems, or your loved one has left you or separated from you without giving any reason ... result is 100% GUARANTEED." What gives extra piquancy to this is that Mark Santer is the Bishop of Birmingham. I feel a Saki short story coming on. The bishop finds that the leaflet preys on his mind. Perhaps he does have problems. Finally he phones the number, and with mysterious speed Mr Abodol is on his doorstep, dressed in African robes, with a caged parakeet, ready for slaughtering ... • I've been enjoying the Guardian's 1,000 songs supplements. I suppose one of the aims of these exercises is to get people groaning at what's left out. No Blowin' in the Wind in the politics section? Where was American Pie in the one about death? And how could the sex section omit Will You Love Me Tomorrow by the Shirelles, surely the most poignant song about losing virginity it's possible to imagine? On the other hand, I was pleased to see it confirmed that the redneck anthem Okie from Muskogee by Merle Haggard really was meant ironically - though the irony is clearly so deft that rednecks could easily sing it without irony.