They all want Lord Myners to negotiate their retirement packages!" shouted David Cameron, as he waved across at the ranks of Labour ministers. "Call a general election, and we can arrange it!" Naturally the theme of prime minister's questions yesterday was unemployment, so it grew bad-tempered very quickly. One of the crossest was Dennis Skinner, who had been shouting at the Tory leader as he usually does. It's a low continuous rumble, like planes over Hounslow. "You should be quiet," Cameron told him. "You always wanted miners to join the government. You've got 'em now - Lord Myners!" This feeble pun deserved a weak smile at best, but Skinner greeted it with a ferocious scowl. He absolutely loathes someone making fun of him. Tell a politician that he is utterly wrong-headed, and he doesn't much mind. Make him into a joke, and he'll hate you forever. Take Anne Snelgrove, a Labour MP who was also yelling at Cameron. The Speaker didn't just tell her to shut up: he suggested she went to a doctor for some tablets. Far more wounding. It all began with a patsy question from another Labour MP who begged the prime minister not to abandon the unemployed. As if Gordon Brown was going to say: "Frankly they can look after themselves. It's a dog-eat-dog, sink-or-swim world out there ..." Instead, he tried to imply that he pondered every single case. "It is a matter of personal regret for me," he said.  "I do not regard unemployment as a statistic. One person, a second person, a third person - [was he going to count up to 2 million? Are they going to get phone calls?] - all need our help." Maybe he needed to make it seem that every single workless individual was a source of personal pain, because his general theme was that things were worse elsewhere. Unemployment was higher in the US, France, Germany and Japan. Is he going to phone them too? "Ah'm so sorry to hear about the loss of yurr job in the Toyota accounts department, Mr Hashimoto!" "Do you know what time it is in Osaka, you idiot?"  Cameron accused him of living in a bunker, in effect moving imaginary schemes to help the unemployed about to no effect. Brown replied with some masterful patronisation. "This is an unprecedented global banking crisis. Unprecedented means 'without precedent'. Global means 'all over the world' ..." Labour MPs laughed because they thought he was being rude to Cameron. Tories laughed because they thought that it showed Brown was stupid. So everyone was happy.  Cameron referred to a few quotes the prime minister had served up. "Yesterday he said in the Guardian that the focus on 'who said what, when and how' was far too divisive. What a complete phoney!" Naturally the Speaker made him withdraw the remark. You can't call a politician a phoney, any more than you could call HM The Queen a good-time girl. "I am happy to withdraw that remark," said the Tory leader with an accompanying chuckle that meant "at least I got it on to the record.