There is something superstitious about the general outrage over Sir Fred Goodwin's monumental pension - which, if he lives to be 80, will amount to &pound;21m, for doing nothing at all. The thinking, if you can call it that, seems to run as follows. By losing his bank &pound;30bn Sir Fred helped get us into the calamity. He needs to be punished. He has not been punished; indeed he has been generously rewarded. Therefore, if we could get his pension back, the problem would suddenly vanish. This is like saying, "If only we could reverse the car, we would unhit that lamp-post." Nonsense, of course, but it is the only explanation I can think of for the Commons Treasury committee's obsession with how Sir Fred's pension went through. Yesterday they hauled up Paul Myners, who as Lord Myners is the financial services minister. He explained, several times, that the question of the pension had been briefly discussed during the weekend of 10 and 11 October last year, when it looked as if the British banking system was about to collapse. They were shovelling &pound;50bn into the furnace just to make sure the entire country didn't go broke. He had other things on his mind. He had been told Sir Fred's pension was "enormous" but had not asked exactly how enormous. The MPs weren't going to let him get away with that. They wanted the facts, all the facts. You just know that if the lads from the Treasury committee had surveyed the battlefield after Passchendaele, they would have wanted to know whether the army was overspending on bully beef. Lord Myners said, in many ways and many times, that Sir Fred's pension was unjustifiably large. It was, he said, "extraordinary", "completely at odds with what the government wanted", "outrageous" and "beyond my comprehension." For some reason which he couldn't begin to imagine, the RBS board had decided to interpret Sir Fred's departure in a stupendously generous way. They had decided in effect to double what he was legally entitled to. (This on top of the fact that, though he joined RBS at the age of 40, his pension had been calculated as if he had joined when 20, so that instead of just being stinking, horribly, mind-meltingly rich, he was even richer than that.)  "It was a quite extraordinary decision. Who made it?" Lord Myners asked. He still doesn't know. The committee pursued him like a dozen cut-price Poirots. You could almost hear their little grey cells whirring. Why had he not insisted on knowing the size of the pension? Wouldn't an elected politician have had the nous to ask? They even tried to winkle out of him the size of his own pension, even though none of it comes from RBS. In a real Agatha Christie, the mystery would have been solved. Poirot would have received from a London theatrical agent a yellowing poster advertising The Great Goodwino - Mesmerist and Mind-Reader. "Zurr problem is solved, mon ami. Sir Fred was able to hypnotise the entire RBS remunerations committee into making ziss unimaginable decision. And now, mah cher Hastings, a small tisane ...