You've probably read enough to be going on with about the Myerson family - you know, the people who threw their son out of the house at the age of 17 for being disruptive, smoking too much skunk and involving his younger siblings. Julie Myerson's book about the affair and the resulting brouhaha strikes me as inevitable. We've had all those bestsellers about abusive parents "my mother chained me to the radiator", "my father raped me", and so forth. Now we have the first book about abusive children. It's revenge of the adults. The book trade is slow to adopt new ideas, until someone gets a bestseller out of the blue, and suddenly every publisher has to have their own version. Time to get on that bandwagon before it rolls on by. My proposal is already in the works, and I'm not going to be stopped by the fact that our problems were as naught compared to the Myersons. "Good God, now he wants to watch Friends while we want Horizon. Can't he miss one single episode? Of course not. We're the worst parents ever, won't let him do anything, all his friends watch Friends, why can't he? He hates us. Time to send him on his way with a fiver and a change of underwear. He can have that box the fridge came in, in case it rains. "Another slammed bedroom door. Quite a familiar sound these days. And what did we do to deserve this? We told her that if she didn't like spag bol she could lump it; I wasn't going to cook a different meal for every member of the family. Now, apparently, we are 'evil'. All her friends say we're embarrassing. As far as I'm concerned she can go and walk the streets in King's Cross. She might just realise that we're a tiny bit kinder and more tolerant than her pimp ..." It will make my fortune, quickly. • A chap I met in the City this week was very pessimistic. He said we could expect to return to the standard of living we had in the Fifties. Sounds grisly, but I can see advantages to that. We were generally healthier because we ate more simply. Holidays could be a bit dull, as few people went abroad, but then there are large parts of Britain which are still largely empty and utterly beautiful. Many aspects of the past have changed for ever; for example, even though scores of cable TV channels will close, there will be far more variety.  Cars won't break down as often as they did five decades ago. We don't actually need the 200,000 books - staggering figure - published in this country every year, but there will still be a huge choice. Dentistry, now more or less painless, isn't going to revert to hours of agony in a chair.  If we can't afford to go on so many pointless journeys, we'll have to live with it. There will be fewer trips to the theatre (who can afford to take a family out in &pound;55 seats?) and more to the cinema.  I recorded here having to make reservations at our local greasy spoon; we'll all eat more pizza and fried chicken. Already it's the cheap supermarkets who are hiring staff, and the takeaway food outlets that are expanding.  There will also be recession chic. In previous hard times hemlines have got longer because women want to demonstrate that they can still afford the extra fabric.  Something I've noticed lately is more people eating lunch while working on their laptop. The risk of getting lettuce or mayonnaise between the keys is considerable, but the message is "I'm still employed and have so much work to do that I can't even stop to eat". • One thing we can do inexpensively is go for walks in the country. Last weekend we went to stay with friends in a village in Wiltshire. Their central heating was broken, but that didn't matter, as it was fun to huddle in the kitchen throwing occasional logs on the stove.  There were thatched roofs, hens clucking in the garden (apparently rural foxes won't go into the village, though our urban ones are as much at home on the mean streets as the Sharks and the Jets) and the mellow clangour of church bells. We went for a walk on the downs in brilliant sunshine. It was all so perfect that my mood was not broken by the driving rain that suddenly appeared when we were two miles from home, or even by the five appalling wind turbines, churning slowly even in the gale, that disfigure the Vale of White Horse. So I won't mention them.  • Good malapropisms: I keep seeing "baited breath", as opposed to "bated" breath, which implies anticipation of the future, as in "abated". Baited breath would mean you had a piece of cheese in your mouth, or a worm hooked onto your tongue. This week a DUP MP, speaking about the killings in the Northern Ireland, said - presumably by accident - that the murderers would be "brought to boot", which I thought rather neat. • Neil Kinnock this week accused Arthur Scargill of "suicidal vanity". I can vouch for the last bit. In 1983, a year before the miners' strike began, I was following him down the front at Brighton towards the Labour party conference. The top of his briefcase had fallen open, and nestling there was the largest can of hair spray I have ever seen, before or since. • Last week I implied that whereas some bank logos, such as Lloyds and Barclays, were based on old inn signs, others were clearly invented by overpaid design consultants, including HSBC's geometric shape.  Now Barbara Merchant, who used to live in Hong Kong, sends me a picture of the foundation stone being laid for the then new HSBC branch in Hankow in 1917. You can clearly see the familiar double triangle which, she says, was based on the cross of St Andrew. I would like to apologise to the bank for any inconvenience caused.