If revenge is a dish best eaten cold, Neil Kinnock likes it served up as a frozen frappucino, with extra ice. Yesterday, at a London meeting to discuss the miners' strike on its 25th anniversary, he let his hatred and rage against Arthur Scargill loose, like a starving dog that's been kennelled for too long. A quarter-century ago I can remember Kinnock saying that one day he would say what he really thought about the miners' leader. Yesterday he did. There is no bitterness as bitter as that felt between old comrades of the left. (Lord) David Hunt, who was Margaret Thatcher's minister for coal at the time, spoke of her with the amused, eyebrow-raised scepticism common to many of his colleagues - the men in suits whom Spitting Image called the vegetables. They don't do genteel, namby-pamby stuff like raised eyebrows on the left. They get stuck in. Scargill never misses a chance to abuse Kinnock, and yesterday he had it shovelled back with extra ordure. The former Labour leader began by saying there was no doubt that Thatcher had long planned for a showdown with the National Union of Mineworkers - building up coal stocks, moving towards a national police force. "But the deciding factor was the suicidal vanity of Arthur Scargill".  That vanity had, he said, fuelled delusions that made his leadership of the NUM a gift to the Tories. People talked about the "leadership" of the union, but in reality there was only one leader, only one leader "who stands accused of walking straight into Margaret Thatcher's carefully laid trap. He walked in to an extent, at a speed, and with a lack of restraint that she could not, in her wildest dreams, have hoped for." Kinnock mentioned the innumnerable efforts made from within the trade union movement to find a compromise agreement, "to rescue the miners from what was clearly, after the first few months, going to be an irrecoverable disaster". He said, as so many people did at the time, that if Scargill had held a national ballot, he would not only have won, but would have helped shift public opinion in the miners' favour. If he had gone along with a compromise, more pits would have stayed open, and with modern advances in technology, coal could even have become a clean liquid or gas fuel, helping to control climate change. "Against a different background, who knows what would have happened?" The problem was that Scargill had always seen the strike as a political struggle. "He gave himself the credit for the success of the 1974 strike [which helped bring down the Heath government] but that was much exaggerated.   "He had the illusion that if the workers were united, they could destabilise, even overthrow a democratically elected government. That was the falsehood of Scargill's conclusion, and that is why I have always condemned him. The miners deserved something much better." He finished to loud applause: "Arthur Scargill and Margaret Thatcher deserved each other. But nobody else did." It must have been very satisfying.