Miserable, gloomy, sad, depressed, sorrowful, pain-racked, down-in-the-mouth: these are just some of the words and phrases in Roget under the heading "unhappy". And they all applied to Labour MPs yesterday while they listened to Harriet Harman deputise at prime minister's questions. You could almost see what was going on inside their heads: "My God, if she ever becomes leader it will be like this every single week!" Meanwhile the Tories opposite were happy, smiling, smirking, cheerful, gleeful, looking like a party that has collectively lost a quid then won the lottery. Oh, she wasn't dreadful - just not good enough. She was dogged and determined. And it wasn't her fault that she was up against William Hague, who is probably the most nimble combatant in the house. He tackled her on the government's working capital scheme, which was supposed to provide immediate help for businesses that need money, but which isn't even in operation yet, six weeks later.  She rose and said primly that "the provisions under that scheme are being finalised". That was the magic moment for the Tories. They realised that she had not come prepared. They started cheering. Like playground bullies, they had caught the whiff of victimhood.  "But the prime minister promised real help for business now. And they only applied to Brussels for permission last week!" Hague replied. He had combined two Tory favourites, government incompetence and Brussels bureaucracy. The Tories were happier than ever.  Then Hague got personal. When Chamberlain lost his party's confidence, he said, Churchill stepped in. When Eden retired, Supermac came forward. "This could be her moment!" he said, to cheers loud and thumping as a sarcastic pile driver.  She must have known that her leadership ambitions would come up. She had had weeks to come up with a zinger. But she didn't have one. "He focuses on political gossip. We focus on fighting for Britain," she said in the tone of a girl reprimanding her little brother for saying "poo".  "She shouldn't describe her leadership campaign as political gossip!" he exclaimed with mock solicitude. "That is no way to go about winning the leadership!" Labour brightened up for a moment and pointed jeering fingers at the Tories' own lost leader. "I am only a deputy now," he replied with mock dignity. "But at least I am a loyal one." She did get in one good line, pointing out that Hague had received &pound;30,000 for two after-dinner speeches for the hated RBS. He went a deep red colour, which suffused his face and scalp, so he looked like a beetroot lollipop invented by Heston Blumenthal. But it was the only high spot. She wrongly said that Sir Fred Goodwin had got his knighthood for charitable work, not services to banking. And she left to no more than a morose muttering from her own side. The only cries of "More!" came from the blissful Tories.