The Commons committees have become like wolves. They love the taste of bankers' flesh. They can't get enough of it now. Yesterday they even turned on the bosses of United Kingdom Investments Ltd - and they're supposed to be on our side!  The UKFI is the body set up to run the government's stake in all those failed banks that have either been taken over, or rescued with vast sums of our money. It was alarming to discover that they have only a dozen or so staff, and operate from a single room smaller than many bank CEOs have for themselves. And, we learned, the top man is paid less than at least one banker's chauffeur. It sounds as if this multi-multi-billion pound operation, on which our survival entirely depends, is being run by a bunch of people numerous enough to operate the average branch of Starbucks. None of that stopped the committee. John McFall, the chairman, demanded to know how many of the people in the failed banks earned more than &pound;100,000 last year. The prey - sorry, the witnesses - said they didn't know. McFall looked grim, like a wolf who has just seen a stag leap to safety off a cliff. In that case, how many staff got bonuses last year of more than &pound;100,000 and more than &pound;1m? "Again, we don't have the figures," said John Kingman, the UKFI chief executive. I thought McFall would explode. "The committee staff phoned you on Friday, and that is why we thought you would have those figures today," he said.  I won't say his teeth were bared, but his eyes certainly were. Kingman, and his acting chairman, Glen Moreno, repeated that they didn't know. They would have to ask the banks. "I thought you were going to be a serious body!" said Mr McFall. "You are standing behind hundreds of millions of taxpayers' money and you don't even apologise! Give us a break!", implying no doubt that if they didn't give him a break, he would give them several, starting with the legs, then the arms ... The victims muttered that they hadn't got the message. Too late. "Highly discourteous!" said McFall. Finally Kingman managed to murmur "I apologise."   McFall wasn't listening. "Is it worth carrying on the session? This is disgraceful!" he yelled. (Of course, the chances of him actually cancelling the session were between highly unlikely and impossible. The MPs enjoy their banker-baiting sessions far too much. Their only regret is that they don't end with public executions.) "We were only briefed about broad areas," said Kingman miserably. McFall consulted. "The clerk tells me you were asked specifically! This is scandalous!" Having attempted to thrash them into submission, they tried to skewer them on Sir Fred Goodwin's pension. The MPs wanted to blame Lord Myners, the minister, for letting him get away with it.  Kingman wanted to blame the board of the Royal Bank of Scotland, which, he said, had not given the full facts to Lord Myners. Specifically, they had not told him that his pension was discretionary and not legally binding. But they didn't get much more. Kingman had come with a catchphrase, which was "I don't know". "I have no idea whether Lord Myners could have prevented it," he said. "It was not obvious to me," he said later. "I am not sure I know the answer to that ... " He had come to resemble Manuel in Fawlty Towers, who also pleaded that he knew nozzing