Questions to the ministers for spare time, or the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, as it is officially known. A slight air of madness clings to this monthly session, not alleviated by seeing Michael Fabricant sitting on the Tory frontbench, his hair-style substance positively glistening with pride. Peter Wishart, the SNP spokesman, seemed obsessed by the horrible danger of "Team GB" football in the 2012 Olympics. This, he thought, was a real danger to the independent national teams of England, Wales, Northern Ireland, and, of course, Scotland. All the home nations should have their own team in the Olympics. Perhaps the Americans will insist on separate teams for every state. In any case, it scarcely matters, since the way things are going the matches will take place on a recreation ground somewhere in Essex, in front of a crowd measured in the tens. Denis MacShane was troubled by the loss of local newspapers. A former journalist himself, he said something which, if anyone had been paying attention, might have seemed deeply controversial. "You can have politicians without democracy," he declared, "but you cannot have democracy without independent journalism, and print journalism is essential." He said that Lord Carter, who is conducting an investigation of something called digital Britain, "may be twittering on about digital problems, but we need an urgent examination of how we can keep our print journalists alive and in business!"  Then the event seemed to go absolutely mad. Tory frontbencher Tobias Elwood spoke about the change in licensing laws. Turning to the Speaker, he shouted at top volume: "I don't know if YOUR drinking habits have changed over the last 10 years, but the government promised a renaissance in our town centres. Binge drinkers would be brought to bear [sic]. A new cafe culture would arrive in Britain. "The reality!" he bellowed, "could not be further from the truth! Since 1997 teenage lawlessness has risen by 300%! One third of girls admit to binge drinking! Under this government binge drinking is becoming the norm! "Labour is giving this nation a beer belly! And, er, er, er, a worrying taste for alcohol-fuelled antisocial behaviour!" He sat back exhausted after what must have been a 2,000-calorie rant. But he had given a hostage to fortune. The minister, Gerry Sutcliffe, only needed to point out that, since he is a teetotaller, the Speaker's drinking habits have not changed one bit over the last 10 years. It was that kind of day.