This week I reread The Monkey's Paw, the ghost story by WW Jacobs. The magical paw grants people's wishes, but in such a way that they regret ever having made the wish. An elderly couple ask for a modest &pound;200, just enough to pay off their house. That moment, there's a knock on the door. It's a man from the local factory where their son has just died in a horrible accident. The firm is prepared to make an ex-gratia payment of &pound;200 ... Sir Fred Goodwin might feel much the same way. Suppose a genie arrived and said: "Look, you are the greatest failure in your profession the world has ever known. You have brought not just your bank but your nation to the edge of ruin. However, I am obliged to grant your wish to have a pension of two-thirds of a million pounds every single year you live, for doing absolutely nothing!" "Is there a catch?" asks Sir Fred, suspiciously. "The catch is," the genie replies, "that you will be the most hated man in Britain. Everywhere you go people will feel loathing and contempt for your incompetence, your greed and your shamelessness." "Call that a catch?" he replies. "I'll take it!" • Masterchef and University Challenge have ended their seasons in the same week. It is hard on some of us. University Challenge won't be back till the autumn, and we have to wait another year for the next Masterchef. By the end, the finalists were cooking stuff you might actually want to eat (though I would have disliked the winner's venison with beetroot, which sounds a bit naff, like Mike Leigh's liver in lager). The shouty intro: "Whoever wins, this will change their lives!" is nonsense. You don't have to win Masterchef to become a chef; almost anyone can. You might as well have Masterteacher or Masterbusdriver. Still, it was quite hypnotic, and I shall miss it very much. It was ghastly that all those anonymous people on the web were offensive about Gail Trimble, who virtually won University Challenge for her college single-handed. People were especially rude about what they thought was her smug little smile whenever she got a question right. But I've done University Challenge, with the Guardian team when they ran The Professionals between the real series, and I know what it's like. You're incredibly anxious. Paxman is barking at you. The other team have their fingers on the buzzers. Even if you know it, you have maybe half a second to drag the answer to the front of your brain. If you get it wrong, you know there will be months before your ignorance is revealed to 3 or 4 million people, including friends and colleagues. No, that wasn't a smile of self-satisfaction, it was a smile of relief.  • Margaret, the BBC's drama about the fall of Thatcher, was a good instance of how important it is to get your version of history in first. Peter Morrison, her campaign manager, is forever cast in the public mind as a complacent sluggard, who didn't see the danger and felt no sense of urgency. This is largely because of a single diary entry by Alan Clark, who went round to Morrison's room to ginger him up, and found him asleep. Clark's version of this event appeared in shortened form on TV. In fact, lots of MPs, many of them now almost forgotten, will live on only because of Clark's barbs, sometimes a single devastating word. The other day I heard a story about Sir Robin Butler, the cabinet secretary to three prime ministers. At a dinner he was asked their reaction when he said something they disagreed with. Thatcher, he said, simply blew up. John Major would not say anything, but would look hurt. And Tony Blair would - pause for effect - say: "Um, yes, I agree with you." • They said that his son's severe disability changed David Cameron, and I am sure they are right. Most years I help MC a charity quiz in Notting Hill, west London, not far from where they live. In 2005 he was a team captain, and as I happily bossed them all around - "if you don't get your answer sheet in NOW, your score will not be counted!" - I reflected that this was probably the last time I could give orders to him.  Last year he was due to return. It's a pretty upmarket crowd, as you might imagine: bankers, lawyers, accountants, quite a few writers and the grander sort of media folk - just the sort of people you'd expect him to be most at home with. But he wasn't there, and I later learned that Ivan had broken his arm while having a seizure. They were in the hospital with him. We were asked not to mention it, and naturally nobody did. Obviously, it was only a glorified pub quiz that they missed, but I thought how demanding life must be, caught between one of the most demanding jobs in the country and a son who needed round-the-clock attention. A night out at which the only thing you had to worry about was the name of the moons of Saturn must have seemed awfully appealing at the time. • You may not have noticed but four leading environmentalists, including Stephen Tindale, the former director of Greenpeace, and Chris Goodall, a Green party candidate, have come out in favour of nuclear power. Tindale now says it is the only way we can fight climate change and that it was "like a religious conversion". Mark Lynas, an environmental scientist, says now that opposing nuclear power was "a colossal mistake". He thinks the ferocious anti-nuclear campaign waged by the greens in the 1970s and 1980s will have devastating effects for the climate. Now they tell us. I have been banging on for ages about how environmentalism is essentially a religious experience. Like religion it requires great faith, and is similarly subject to apostasy and conversion. And, might I ask, if these people admit to having been wrong for so many years, why should we trust them now?