Sorry" is the word of the week, and yesterday David Cameron tried to get Gordon Brown to say it. Fat chance. Politicians find it easy to apologise for things they had nothing to do with - such as the slave trade and the Irish potato famine - but not for anything they got wrong. Gordon Brown can't do it. If he let the swing door go and it biffed you in the face, he'd say: "I am well aware of the very real issues involving swing doors. I will say that keeping the door open was not an option." Actually, I don't suppose he would have apologised if he had been running things at the time of the potato famine. "I have commissioned an independent inquiry into the challenges presented by the shortage of edible tubers in Ireland, and this will report in due course. In the meantime, my special adviser Dean Jonathan Swift has produced a paper recommending that, in the meantime, Irish people should consider eating their own children. The whole house will wish to consider his proposal ..." No, the day that Gordon Brown does a proper apology is the day that Boris Johnson combs his hair, Harriet Harman does the can-can, and Amy Winehouse trains for the London marathon.  Tories know this very well, of course, so every time he left the tiniest gap in his speech they bellowed "Sorry! Sorry! Sorry!" so that it sounded like the inside of a very noisy tube train at rush hour. It should have been a pretty disastrous day for the prime minister. Unemployment has gone over two million. Yesterday morning the governor of the Bank - normally a Pollyanna figure compared with some - warned glumly of a "deep recession". Mr Brown's closest economic adviser, Ed Balls, had told us that we faced the worst recession for more than 100 years. A whole century! How long before they reopen all those workhouses which are presently converted to chic executive apartments and wine bars? And on top of all that, he had been obliged to get rid of one of his advisers, Sir James Crosby, whom he himself put forward for a knighthood, who was deputy chairman of the FSA, and who appears to have led a secret Mr Hyde-style life threatening and firing anyone who warned that the banks were overextending themselves. So the prime minister took his inspiration from Marshal Foch: "My centre is giving way, my right is retreating: situation excellent, I am attacking." He sat down to roars of applause from his own side. You couldn't call it a triumph, but it was a long way from a wipeout. David Cameron tried to get him to admit he'd been wrong to appoint Sir James. Sir James might have been startled to learn how little he had done for his old friend Gordon. "He did two reports. He has completed those reports, and he is no longer an economic adviser." Somehow it had nothing to do with anything that really mattered. "If I may say so, we are facing very big issues in the economy. If the Conservative party wants to trivialise them, it does them no merit." Eh? Trivialise? But there was still time for them to wind up with the compulsory prepared soundbites. Mr Cameron: "Incompetence plus arrogance equals two million unemployed!" Gordon Brown: "Wrong, wrong, wrong every time!" Labour MPs: "More! More!" And an apology?  Perhaps I just missed it.