David Cameron bounced into his press conference. He gets more like Tigger every day. He arrived at the podium, bouncing up and down, hands flapping. "Worra, worra, worra," he said, or words to that effect. He told us about his exciting new Economic Recovery Committee, which includes - apart from Tory politicians - top names in business. They have even got the head of Google, Eric Schmidt. I wonder how Mr Schmidt tracked them down. Presumably he "Cameroned" him. This committee will have real power, or at least as much real power as anyone without real power can have. They will be an "executive" committee, whatever that means. I assume they will meet in an executive suite, with executive pen sets, executive toys, and executive biscuits. He read out all the names, missing out the "Sirs" and "Lords". "They have more titles than Joe Calzaghe," he said, "so I didn't bother to read them out!" The arms flailed again as he got onto city bonuses. "The government has been asleep on the job!" he said. Then he grabbed a metaphor like Tigger seizing hold of the tablecloth, and dragged it to the floor. "They didn't just shut the door after the horse had bolted, they shut the door after the horse had won the 3.20 at Uttoxeter!" Whoa, steady on! Any horse owner would be thrilled if that happened. No matter. It was outrageous that banks saved by taxpayers' money were now paying their staff huge bonuses. "Give less money to rich people!" - the Tories' improbable new battle cry. "The banks have got to wake up and smell the coffee," he said. I've always taken that to mean, "cheer up, and appreciate good things." What I suspect he meant was that they should wake up and smell the seeping sewage. It seemed Tigger hadn't quite worked out the details. He insisted that if a business of any kind did poorly, everyone should suffer, even if they weren't responsible. Did that mean that nobody who worked for a rescued bank should get a bonus? "I'm not saying that the woman who runs the bank in Auchtermuchty shouldn't have her small bonus ..." he said in a desperate bid for the Scottish vote. Well, would he take money for Tory funds from someone who had worked for one of the rescued banks and taken their bonus anyway? A slight, un-Tiggerish pause followed. "No, I have to fund a political party. We get money from a variety of sources. It would be a better use of money for them to help the Conservative party sort out this mess, rather than buying a new Ferrari." Aha, that was it! Nobody in a failed bank should get a bonus - unless they want to give it to the Tories