Could Gordon Brown ever admit that he was wrong? It seems unlikely. He won't even say that he was mistaken when he promised an end to boom and bust. As for "British jobs for British workers" - you can't say that he stands by it, but he certainly won't renounce it. It's as if the line was an old girlfriend who's turned up unexpectedly at the same party. He can't bring himself to acknowledge her, but equally he can't ask her to leave. He just wishes she'd go away. To be fair, if you read the original speech, back in 2007, he clearly didn't mean "British jobs for British workers and for nobody else". In context, he was talking about using skills, training and creativity to produce more jobs all round. But it didn't seem like that. It did sound, in the words of Keith Vaz, like employment apartheid. And now it haunts him. David Cameron, a very persistent ghoul, repeatedly asked him to confess that it showed a lack of judgment he should now regret. Regret? Gordon doesn't do regret in the way that most of us don't do crocodile wrestling. He wouldn't know where to start. And all politicians loathe admitting they were wrong. Ever. If they did so once, people would assume they were always wrong. Or so they imagine. And if he did admit his error, the headlines would be terrible. "British jobs for foreigners - Brown's new message" would be all over the papers. "[Word used by Carol Thatcher] should get your job, says Gordon." So what he did was answer an entirely different question. "Can anyone here say that they do not want British workers to get jobs in our country?" Eh? That's not just evading the point. He hasn't missed the barn door: he wasn't even aiming at the barn. This is perhaps how Gordon would answer other challenges to his accuracy. "Will the prime minister admit that when he said that the Battle of Waterloo took place in 1945, he was completely and utterly wrong?" "I will tell the Rt Hon gentleman what is wrong. It is wrong to ignore and disparage the tremendous achievement of the brave British soldiers who fought against Napoleon and who in many cases laid down their lives for our freedom!" Or, this. "Will the prime minister admit that he was in error when he said last week that there was no prospect of snow in the immediate future?" "May I say that it is the Rt Hon gentleman who knows about 'snow'. When will he admit the role that white powder played in his early life? I for one will take no lessons ...". Denis MacShane started bellowing. The Speaker told him to behave. David Cameron leapt. It was Mr MacShane who, commenting on BJBW - as we now call it - had said that politicians should always choose their words very carefully before saying anything. Gordon Brown failed to apologise one last time. When he sat down David Cameron could be heard saying to Mr MacShane: "Thank you Denis, thank you for helping me out."  It was a sweet moment. Friendship across the chamber, even if coated in sarcasm as a foot of snow.