Channel surfing in parliament: Branngg! Questions on universities and skills. David Lammy, the Afro-Caribbean junior minister, is across the table from the Tory spokesman, Adam Afriyie, whose father came from Ghana. I think they are the first black MPs to face each other in this position. People often ask, when will we have a black head of government, like Obama? The answer is not yet, but it may be on the way. Bweep! They discussed university courses. "How are we to grow more stem graduates?" asked the Lib Dems' Phil Willis. This sounded like some spooky cloning experiment, but nobody thought it odd. They exist in their own, enclosed world of jargon. The question actually means "how can we persuade more undergraduates to take degrees in science, technology, engineering and maths?" But that would take longer to say, and everyone would understand, which would never do. Pwang! I go over to the House of Lords to inspect some ermine collar jobs. A mere fifty quid bunged to a passing peer gets me a seat in the gallery (no, no, I made that up! It only cost &pound;25!). The peers are discussing "gender equality" in the workplace. Norman Tebbit looks ill. Why is there is a "gross imbalance" in the Crown Prosecution Service? Twice as many women as men are employed there! Baroness Royall, leader of the House, appears to take this wind-up seriously. "We need to make more men aware of the many opportunities in the Crown Prosecution Service," she says gravely, as if it mattered. Thrumm! They move on to the disappearance of the old light bulbs. "I am incandescent about this!" says Lord Harrison, mustering the first of many puns. "Where was that decision made? How many politicians does it take to change a lightbulb?" The minister, Lord Hunt, almost groaned. "It takes one member of the Lords to change a lightbulb, and 712 to debate the matter for endless hours." Chung! Back in the Commons, the new shadow leader, Alan Duncan, is facing Harriet Harman. Or "He-man meets Har-Man," as he puts it, coquettishly. He wants to know why the government has abandoned its promise of all single-sex hospital wards. "With which member of the cabinet would she be prepared to share a mixed-sex ward?" Mr Duncan has an ability to make almost everything sound erotic. Ms Harman promises to refer something to "the Ombudsperson", to Tory laughter. But if a chairwoman is known as "chair", shouldn't the Ombudsperson (who is a woman) be known as "Ombud"? Or just "Om"?