It was Alan Duncan's first appearance as shadow leader of the house. Duncan is a sprightly and feisty speaker, so we were looking forward to that. But first we had a discussion about bits of string. When visitors come to the Commons they go through a security check then get a pass which includes a photograph of themselves. This is hung from a cord. Andrew Pelling wanted to know what happened to these "lanyards" when the visitors leave. Were they recycled? Or, he implied, were there landfills filled with lanyards? Nick Harvey, from the House of Commons commission, said that they were recovered at the exits. Some 30% were recycled. This didn't seem very much. He said that there would need to be "free-standing devices" for people to hang their used lanyards. The problem was that many visitors took their passes home as souvenirs. No doubt this is because a pewter House of Commons tankard would cost much more. You may wonder why, with the economy in freefall, MPs had time to debate string. But I say, at least they can do something about string, whereas everything the government does to help the economy appears to have no effect whatever. So it was time well spent. Soon afterwards Duncan sprang into action. He is not only openly gay but rather camp. Harriet Harman, the actual leader of the house, is possibly the least camp person in public life. She makes Gordon Brown look like Julian Clary. Duncan said how excited he was in his new job. "I have always had a dangerously romantic affection for the House of Commons. It looks as though my teenage years reading Hansard and Erskine May under the duvet has finally paid off!" He said it in a very coquettish way, as if reading those volumes was quite as exciting as what most other teenage boys do under the duvet. Harman replied. She was glad to welcome him. They had already met in private, she said. "We had a man-to-man chat," she said. Oh, the shiver of ambiguity! The sheer sexual frisson! Duncan was delighted. He threw back his head, laughing. Then he raised his arms and curved them from side to side, like a short man trying to steer an imaginary bus. I have no idea what this signified. Harman went on to say that she had perused his website. Clearly someone had hacked into it, because he himself could not possibly have written lines such as "Alan Duncan has been a pivotal influence on the fortunes of the Conservative party for over 10 years." Duncan thought that was very funny too, though he was not quite so pleased by David Heath, the Lib Dem shadow leader.  "I welcome him to his place, and I am sure he is indeed - a pivot." He made it sound like a very offensive word.