The important topic at prime minister's questions yesterday was, naturally, the return of Kenneth Clarke to the Tory frontbench. He sprawled there looking cheerful, like a man enjoying a pie after a hard day's bird-watching. You felt his contentment would have been complete if he'd been allowed a pint and a cigarillo. But they had to go through the motions of talking about the economic collapse first. David Cameron pointed out that unemployment had risen by 78,000. Gordon Brown said in the kind of gruff, choky way he uses to mark the deaths of British servicemen, "every job lost is a matter of regret and sadness for us all". "Except yours!" chirruped one Tory, and the mood was set. Again, an army of soundbites was mobilised to tackle our problems.  Both leaders paid tribute to Barack Obama. According to Gordon Brown, the president supports everything the British government has been doing about the crisis.  "The one thing he did not say in his speech was 'Fellow Americans, let's do nothing'!" Mr Brown's (fictitious) charge against the Tories is that their response to the economic collapse is to take no action at all, their thumbs pushed firmly up their backsides. Cameron wondered why the pound had lost 4% of its value in one day. Brown appeared to be chuckling. "Only the prime minister could laugh at these plummeting prices!" said the Tory leader. He wanted more details about the latest bank bail-out. The prime minister had no intention of providing these. He couldn't wait to get on to the subject of Ken Clarke. "You now have the benefit of a shadow, shadow chancellor to help you," he said.  The implication that Clarke had been appointed because George Osborne wasn't up to the job delighted Labour MPs, who have not had a lot to laugh about lately. "I am delighted that you have mentioned my honourable friend," Cameron snapped back. "The difference between this former chancellor and that former chancellor is that this one left a golden legacy, and that one wrecked it!" They then diverted to a magnificently pointless argument about what Boris Johnson actually thought. The answer is that Boris thinks whatever it is politically expedient to think at any one moment.  But neither of them made that point. Instead Gordon Brown decided he would try to insert a stiletto in the new shadow business secretary, who had said recently, in his backbench days, that Tory policy on Europe was "crackpot", "dotty", and "absurd".  Of course he did, and no doubt he said many far more damaging things in private. But that's not the point. If Brown can bring in Peter Mandelson, his greatest political enemy, to help with the looming catastrophe, surely David Cameron can cope with Clarke's views on Europe.  You might as well point out that Ken supports Nottingham Forest, and Cameron doesn't.