Across the Atlantic they were organising perhaps the greatest political show ever seen. Back in London it was the usual shambles. The home secretary was due to talk to the home affairs committee about the arrest of the Tory MP Damian Green.  At the instant she was supposed to walk in, a crisp, she-who-must-be-obeyed voice informed us over the PA system: "A fyah hes been confirmed in your area. Livv the building immediately, and geoh to your essembly area. Do not use the lifts!"  The voice told us several times. In a British way, we decided that it might just be serious and shambled out asking: "Where is our assembly area?" It must have been like that on the Titanic, before they realised there really was an iceberg. The home secretary peered in on us, looked startled, then turned on her heel. Outside a great crowd assembled, creating the strange democracy of the fire alarm, as the most senior and most important jostle with the unknown and unrecognised. There were MPs such as Michael Howard and Geoffrey Robinson, people you've seen on TV such as Jonathan Dimbleby (why no ceremonial Dimbleby in Washington?), plus witnesses, journalists, visitors, lobbyists, researchers, cooks, cleaners, and schoolchildren getting a scary class in how politics really works. I fell in with a Labour backbencher. "That cut-glass voice who told us to get out," he said, "belonged to Judy Scott-Thompson. We were all terrified of her when she was the accommodation clerk. But she is still with us, whenever there is a fire. Or fyah." Or rather, when there isn't a fire. It was a false alarm. Apparently it is usually a piece of toast getting stuck in the toaster.  As my MP chum said: "This building, Portcullis House, is supposed to be terrorist-proof. But it can't cope with a piece of toast. The smoke detectors are obviously calibrated to be too sensitive. And it happens so often that when there really is a fire, we'll ignore the voice. We'll stay where we are and get burned to a crisp in the conflagration." And if that isn't a metaphor for the present economic crisis, I'd like to know what is. Finally we reassembled. The home secretary had vanished. A search party (Patrick Mercer) was sent out to find her. She duly appeared from whichever place of refuge she had been hustled. The committee wanted to know why she had been one of the last to know about the arrest of Green back in November. She seemed rather vague, perhaps because she is waiting on the inquiry, which in turn is waiting on the Speaker's inquiry, which is waiting on the police investigation. Was she glad that she hadn't known in advance? "I wouldn't say I was glad or unglad," she said. Unglad! Another perfect coining for our present crisis.