It's always slightly embarrassing when an MP pretends to go berserk. There's something a little self-conscious and over-planned about it. So when John McDonnell, the Labour MP for Hayes and Harlington - a constituency that would be badly affected by a third Heathrow runway - picked up the mace while bellowing at Geoff Hoon, one's first instinct was to cough discreetly and look away. Rather like when the crazy person gets on the bus and shouts at the driver. It began when the transport secretary made his statement. He didn't half go on. You know the feeling at the end of a long-haul flight. You're tired, fed-up, desperate to get off and go home. Then the pilot says that air traffic control has warned that we're going into a holding pattern. You sit squirming, the drone of the engines becomes intolerable, the same views whizz past you time and again. Just like listening to a Geoff Hoon statement. On and on he went, padding the statement out with lunatic prophecies about the level of emissions in 2050 (did Harold Wilson predict air transport figures for this year, back in 1968?) Things perked up when the Tories got going. They too were affecting almost uncontrollable rage. "We will fight this every inch of the way!" yelled Theresa Villiers, Mr Hoon's opposite number. More illness and death near the airport! Blighting the lives of millions! The government was "recklessly irresponsible!" But she was out-raged by Norman Baker for the Lib Dems. The government's promises were like a fox's pledge not to harm chickens. The plans had been "cobbled together to sugar the poison pill!" It was, he said, a terrible day, a terrible day! How could anyone get angrier? They would need, as the sports commentators say, to dig deep. It was a big ask. Mr McDonnell readied himself. Then, like a pole-vaulter who has been training for years for this moment, he hurtled down the track. "Absolute disgrace ... worthless commitments ... a betrayal of future generations, a betrayal of my constituents who will lose their homes, their schools, their churches and their cemeteries!" No vote for parliament was a betrayal of democracy itself! He finished - we thought - with a line that made up in flair what it lacked in grammar. "Will there be a vote - and why not?" Mr Hoon did his bumbling country solicitor act. It was a long-standing tradition that the house did not vote on planning matters, as if the next thing we knew, they'd be wanting to vote on the Pettigrews' loft conversion in Reigate. It was an issue for the whole country. Too late. Mr McDonnell had marched down the aisle to the table of the house, where he shouted: "We represent the country!" He grabbed the mace, yelling at Mr Hoon: "You are a disgrace to democracy!" At this point he realised he had no idea what to do with the big gold bauble, so he rather lamely dropped it on the bench where Dennis Skinner sits. Luckily Mr Skinner was not there. A ceremonial mace on the head could do a lot of damage to an elderly gentleman. Mr McDonnell was ordered out, to his evident satisfaction. In the meantime, the whole affair was a complete waste of time, since even if Labour miraculously hold power after the next election, they will probably need the Lib Dems, and the third runway would be a deal-breaker.