The government continues its bold attempt to solve the economic crisis through soundbites. Yesterday Gordon Brown was asked what we presumed was a planted question about support for small businesses. The prime minister replied that it was "real help for business now. It is targeted and focused and ... it is real help for small businesses ... it is real help for businesses looking for working capital over the next year. It is real help for high-technology firms, real help, and real help with credit insurance. This is real help, real help funded by the government!" He used the phrase eight times. I know that it was the first question time since Hogmanay, and I know Scots love leaping around in kilts at this time of year. But an Eightsome Real already? David Cameron claimed that the plan was simply copied from the Conservatives. "It is not a butler they need in Downing Street. It's a photocopier!" (Apparently they are appointing someone to act as a butler there. My recommendation would be Paul Burrell. Gordon Brown would love someone creepy who lays on the floor to lick his shoes and murmur "Ooh, sire, you are so prudent!") There then followed one of those entirely mad scenarios we sometimes get.  David Cameron wanted to assail the prime minister over the recent cut in VAT, which has apparently has had no effect at all except to make lots of retailers angry.  By contrast, Brown wished to moan about how the Conservatives had opposed his "fiscal stimulus".  He did try to tackle the Tory question, if briefly. The VAT cut saved the average family more than &pound;5 a week, or &pound;275 a year, he said. "That &pound;5 a week may not matter to members of the opposition frontbench," he added, in a desperate attempt to make a failed policy look like a mighty blow against rich snobs and for equality. But they didn't want to talk about the same thing at all. It was like watching an argument between two people who have no interest in the topic the other is discussing. Cameron: I don't know how you can suggest that Liverpool are going to win the Premiership! Steven Gerrard might not even be playing for them soon! Prime minister: No, it is nonsense to suggest that bacon and eggs are a healthy breakfast. Porridge is full of fibre and provides lasting energy for a full morning's work. Cameron: The whole house will know that is rubbish. Only this week Ronaldo was named world footballer of the year! Prime minister: I don't know why the leader of the opposition doesn't listen to what I am saying. Yoghurt and fruit are vital for reducing cholesterol levels ... Meanwhile, the economy spirals downwards.  Lady Vadera, whose calamities include the part-privatisation of the London underground, yesterday saw the first green shoots of recovery.  Things must be even worse than we had thought.