In the House of Lords it isn't always Labour against Tory. Yesterday it was God v Mammon. There was no vote, but I'd say that the mood of the house was largely with God. The archbishop of York, John Sentamu, had asked a question about the short-selling of shares. He has form. In a speech last autumn he described the people who had been short-selling against HBOS, and nearly ruined it, as "bank robbers".  Up against him, representing Mammon, was the new Treasury minister Lord Myners. It was a tough gig. The gap-toothed 59-year-old archbishop has become something of a national treasure, chopping up his dog collar on TV and wearing brilliantly coloured vestments while playing exotic musical instruments. Being rude to him would be like hitting Alan Bennett or calling Joanna Lumley a stupid old bag. It would not make you friends. The archbishop asked if the minister agreed that the quickest way of making money out of a bank was through short-selling and rumour? Now short-selling was legal again, was he sure the rumour element had vanished? And now that we part-owned some banks, "couldn't somebody bet on the taxpayers losing more money on short-selling our own interests?" I wasn't sure what this meant, but it sounded ungodly. Lord Myners realised that he had to tread carefully. He began by praising to the heavens the speech in which the archbishop had called down anathemas upon the short-sellers.  It had been a wondrous address, a sort of Sermon on the Mount with jokes, he didn't say but clearly meant. "All members of the house who are seeking amusing anecdotes to tell in after-dinner speeches should read it!" he averred. (I checked it out, and there were some good - if whiskery - stories. Such as the one about the monkey in the zoo who has the Bible in one hand and On the Origin of Species in the other. "I am trying to work out if I am my brother's keeper or my keeper's brother," the monkey explains.) Having done this, Lord Myners decided to blind us with technicalities: " ... transparency, a move to symmetry with an exposure to long positions", he said, no doubt confident that few peers would have a clue what he meant. Lord Barnett, who was a Treasury minister under Harold Wilson, undoubtedly did know what he meant. But he was in faux-na&iuml;f mood. No doubt there were benefits from short-selling. Perhaps Lord Myners could write a list and put it in the library so everyone could read them.  This heavy sarcasm was possibly lost. Lord Myners compared short-selling to people who sell books and TVs on the internet before they have acquired the goods they intend to sell. The comparison between a secondhand copy of, say, Dear Fatty by Dawn French, and one of Europe's largest banks was not necessarily helpful. Then a peer (we couldn't see who) rose to shout that the Church of England was involved in short-selling itself. Which it was, having invested heavily in a short-selling hedge fund called Man Group. So the conflict was now between God, Mammon and Man! The confusion was total.