Six signs that Gordon Brown may be losing it 1 He started ringing voters at random, sometimes early in the morning. Gordon Brown: "Prime minister here! Noo then, what is on your mind?" Random voter: "I don't need any life insurance. Clear off." 2 He turned up late for the signing of the Lisbon treaty, and only put his name to it when everyone else had gone. Was there nobody in Downing Street to say "Prime minister, that is quite the stupidest idea you have ever had"? 3 Asked on the radio what had happened to his promise of "no return to boom and bust", he said he had actually referred to "Tory boom and bust", as if they were in some way different. 4 Pursued 42-day detention without trial, in the face of all odds, and even after it had been fiercely attacked by Eliza Manningham-Buller, the former head of MI5. 5 Compared himself to Heathcliff in a magazine interview. 6 Claimed to have saved the world. Most boring speech Alistair Darling, for the budget. He sent Geoffrey Howe to sleep. That takes skill of a high order. Most sycophantic speech Nicolas Sarkozy during his state visit, when, alone among French leaders, he thanked this country for its part in the last war. And sprayed us with rhetorical cream, maple syrup and chocolate sauce. Most foolish remark made by a back-bench MP on local TV when he assumed no one would be watching David Drew, Labour MP for Stroud, on The Politics Show West. "Gordon was never my choice. Gordon is a tragedy." It was all over the national papers next day. Rudest remark about the prime minister by a retiring MP Bob Marshall-Andrews (Lab, Medway): "Gordon has the judgment of King Lear, the decisiveness of Hamlet, the paranoia of Othello and the loyalty of Brutus. But at least we've got rid of Lady Macbeth." Quickest plunge from hero to zero David Miliband, seen as a contender for the Labour leadership, made a dull, lacklustre speech at the conference, then - fatally - was photographed holding a banana. What's wrong with that? you may ask. Almost everyone eats bananas. It's just that he was holding it up in a silly way. Most pointless hissy mince-out The Liberal Democrats left the chamber en masse because they didn't like some ruling by the Speaker. Group flounces always look really, really stupid. Most confusing clause in a parliamentary bill From the human fertilisation bill: "Clause 4, page 4, leave out line 30 and insert - '(e) any embryo not falling within paragraphs (a) to (d) which contains both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA of a human and nuclear or mitochondrial of an animal ("animal DNA") but in which the animal DNA is not predominant'." Try stitching that on your banner. Weirdest obsession Nick Clegg, with the number 30. This, he said, was the maximum number of women he had slept with before he got married. And &pound;30 was what he thought the weekly old age pension was. Is this numeral the answer to all other questions? "What percentage should the basic rate of income tax be?"; "How many Lib Dem MPs will there be after the next election?" Most annoying jargon of the year Dept of Work and Pensions: "We are messianic about pathways"; "Wrap-around care will be rolled out". Meal of the year 1= The takeaway curry in the Treasury before the bank bail-out; 1= the meal shared in a Corfu taverna at which Peter Mandelson and George Osborne discussed the many shortcomings of Gordon Brown. Saddest love tragedy Lembit Opik lost his Cheeky Girl, whichever one it was. Most hypocritically received death Gwyneth Dunwoody, whose passing was most deeply regretted in public by the very government that hated her and tried to get her shunted off the chairmanship of the transport committee. Most typical New Labour bizarre spin Ruth Kelly, making an emotional speech about her resignation at the end of the Labour party conference. She said: "I hope you will forgive me for departing from my text for a moment" - a line which actually appeared in the text from which she was allegedly departing. Most peculiar revelation In his autobiography John Prescott claimed that in 2004 Tony Blair had been depressed and considering whether he should resign. The discovery of his teenage son lying drunk in Leicester Square was almost the last straw. But the then deputy prime minister bought him a plastic fish, Harry the Haddock, which, at the touch of a button, sang Don't Worry Be Happy. According to Prescott, this gave him such a boost that Blair soldiered on for three more years.