Gordon Brown was out of the country, again. Apparently when a person saves someone's life, they take a keen interest in how the saved life is lived. They don't like to feel they wasted their time, or risked their own life in vain. In the same way Mr Brown has been inspecting the world that he rescued, this time by going to Iraq. He should be back when you read this, just in time to miss prime minister's questions. Which is why his deputy, Harriet Harman, had to answer for him yesterday. By tradition, David Cameron was also absent, so she faced William Hague. For once she had something to announce. Central Ayrshire MP Brian Donohoe had been told to ask what the government was doing to bring lower energy prices, faithfully reading from the script provided. Ms Harman said that following the fall in the price of oil the energy companies should reduce their prices. If these firms didn't, the government would force them. Labour MPs cheered as if something might actually happen. I found myself thinking, "Well that won't lose anyone much sleep." This government has always been longer on threats than on action. "Judge us by our words, not our deeds!" is its battle cry. Mr Hague pointed out that the news of the prime ministerial trip to Iraq had been leaked last week. "The news clearly relates to national security, yet no one has been arrested," he said, sarcastically.  He then moved on to the matter of the economy. Here things became depressing. Both sides had done little more than bring along a new stack of soundbites to lob at each other. Parliament is increasingly like a war fought with paintballs. They land with a satisfying splodge, but no lasting damage is done. Ms Harman said that Tory plans were "not worth the press release they are written on". Mr Hague wanted the chancellor of the exchequer to "pull his finger out". (Does the shadow foreign minister know the exceedingly vulgar origin of this phrase?) This was a "say anything, spin anything, achieve nothing government". Ms Harman accused the Tories of "talking down the economy", which is what governments always say when the economy needs no talking down. Mr Hague riposted that unemployment was soaring, debt was rocketing, good businesses were collapsing, and there were heavy tax rises on the way. "If the prime minister is saving the world, God help us when he moves on to the rest of the solar system." Ms Harman said she would rather have Superman leading her party than be in a party led by the Joker. She clearly didn't realise that the Joker is not an daffy simpleton but a cackling evildoer. And that was it. Merry Christmas to all of them.