There's a fascinating article in the new edition of T3, the gadget magazine, offering the 10 worst technology predictions ever made. There are some beauties. As late as 2005 Sir Alan ("Sralan") Sugar declared that the iPod would never take off. Daryl Zanuck predicted the failure of television because "people will soon get tired of staring at a plywood box every night". In 1977 the boss of Digital Equipment said that nobody would need a computer in their home - a view I remember sharing, though of course until the arrival of the internet, computers were almost largely used for word processing, calculating and very simple games. Back in 1883 Lord Kelvin said that X-rays would turn out to be a hoax, and in 1878 the chief engineer at the Post Office said we had no need for the telephone in Britain, as we still had plenty of messenger boys. Someone else - I can't track down the quote - said, by contrast, that the phone would make personal visits unnecessary. In the same way, more recently, we were told that computers would mean we could all work from home, and commuter trains and buses would rattle emptily from place to place. I was reminded of those people who go through life pilloried for their mistaken choices such as the chap at Decca records who turned down the Beatles, and all the publishers who rejected Harry Potter. Nobody seems to commemorate the correct decisions. There must be someone who said that computers would revolutionise cheap air travel, or an A&amp;R manager who turned down The Gilded Marzipan Dream because they were terrible, or the astute publisher's reader who said nobody would ever buy My Life and Times by Sir Gilbert Hatherwaite, Bart.  • To the annual political cartoon awards in London, which are always jolly, and filled with cartoonists wondering if they dare vote for themselves without anyone noticing. Steve Bell won the gong for cartoon of the year - the one reprinted in yesterday's Guardian, showing Gordon Brown trying to waterski up a brown creek and Alistair Darling without a paddle. Charles Clarke did the honours, no doubt because he has such a caricaturable face. He said that it might not have been so; when he was four or five, his parents offered to stop his ears sticking out by means of a simple operation. He declined, to the great relief - decades later - of all those present. A colleague of the late Raymond Jackson, "Jak" of the London Evening Standard, had an interesting tale. Jak was famous for including the names of firms - restaurants, pubs, even skip hire companies - in his cartoons. He would then sell the originals to the people mentioned, so getting two substantial fees for each drawing. What I hadn't realised is that he used to pre-sell the slot. He'd ring up Knight, Frank &amp; Rutley, for instance, and ask if they wanted to appear as the estate agent that day. Then he'd call Strutt &amp; Parker and see if they offered more. Only when the auction was over would he start on the drawing.  • Last week I mentioned the BBC's Christmas programming, which sounds fun if a little retro. This week the Yuletide Radio Times special edition arrived, so I looked to see what Sky is offering. Bear it in mind when you next read what an outrage the licence fee is. On Christmas night Sky is showing Guinness World Records Smashed, Gladiators - The Legends Strike Back, part one of a series called Bones, and All Star Don't Forget the Lyrics.  The excuse always is that Christmas Day draws no advertising because everyone is spent up. But they still expect you to pay good money for this dross. • Someone else who seems to want plenty of the public's money is Lord Saville, whose inquiry into Bloody Sunday has been going for more than a decade, and won't be complete until the end of next year. It has already cost &pound;182m, and counting. Not surprisingly, the Commons Northern Ireland committee wants to know how this remarkable delay and astonishing expenditure has come about. They asked Saville to see them. He declined firmly, even brusquely. He had nothing more to say than he had already said publicly. He had interviewed 2,500 witnesses, and seen tens of thousands of documents. He was determined to deal with all this "fairly, accurately and thoroughly" (you can say that again) and so, "in these circumstances, I regret to say that I must decline the invitation". I think that's a bit of cheek. It has cost far more than anyone imagined, and taken vastly longer. An explanation would be courteous. The committee could - and I think should - oblige him to attend, but of course they won't. • The brilliant sitcom Outnumbered this week had an airport scene we all recognise. The wife - "how many more times do I have to tell you, yes, I have got the boarding passes?" - got to the gate and of course couldn't find the passes. But there seems to be a serious increase in the time people spend wasting other people's time: the customer in the supermarket queue to whom it comes as a surprise that they have to pay, and spends 10 minutes looking for the right card; the passenger who decides that rush hour at a suburban station is the perfect time to book a return to the Mull of Kintyre for next May. The other day I was at a station bookshop, buying a paper. They had a three for two offer, and the woman in front wanted four books. You'd have thought the question of which three had been selected for the deal, so which was therefore the cheapest and thus free, would have taxed Stephen Hawking. Finally the manager was summoned, and by the time the matter had been settled the queue stretched out of the shop to the departure boards. • I know it's old hat, but nothing stops Christmas round robin letters. We'll have another run through this year - please send them to me here at the Guardian. Anonymity guaranteed.