The cabinet secretary, Sir Gus O'Donnell, the panjandrum of panjandrums, a great, juicy blood orange among the mere mandarins, joined the swelling ranks of people in authority who should have known about Damian Green's arrest but didn't. Sir Gus - even his initials spell "God" - was appearing in front of the Commons public administration committee. Actually I am being unfair. Sir Gus may be a grandee, but he is not at all grand, and usually speaks in English - unlike several of his predecessors who preferred the more formal and elaborate British. If they didn't know something, they would say: "You are encroaching upon the margins of my awareness of this matter". Sir God just says: "I don't know". But the lads were in stroppy mood. Sir Gus started with an encomium for the civil service which he leads. "If you cut a civil servant in half, something I hope you wouldn't do very often, you'd find running through him like a stick of rock: honesty, objectivity, integrity and impartiality!"  They clearly decided that this didn't apply to Christopher Galley, the official who has admitted leaking Home Office information to Green. Why, they wanted to know, had this Conservative activist been allowed to work in the private office of a Labour home secretary? Didn't anyone think to Google him before he started work? asked Gordon Prentice, a troublemaker of considerable skill. "The fact that someone has been politically active is not a bar to them joining the civil service," said Sir Gus. Mr Prentice, who loves these moments - it's the bit where the witness's eyes start, ever so slightly, to bulge - pointed out that Mr Galley's entry on Friends Reunited helpfully listed his interests as "centre-right politics, the stock market, political satire, and the miners' strike". Actually that sounded rather New Labour to me, but that was not the inference we were being invited to draw.   "Surprise, surprise," said Sir Gus (an earlier cabinet secretary might have burbled, "it may strike the committee as trespassing in the higher realms of probability ...") "but the civil service attracts people who are interested in politics." They wouldn't, however, shut up. Even Charles Walker, a Tory, found it shocking that someone involved in Conservative politics had been at the home secretary's elbow. "This is a Whitehall farce!" he exclaimed, with more passion than originality. He glowered at Sir Gus. "This is farce, and you can barely keep a straight face!" he barked. It did all seem rather improbable. For instance, the Metropolitan police had told the Cabinet Office at 1pm on November 27 that they were searching four properties connected with a Tory frontbencher.  Then 90 minutes later the rozzers called back to say that they had slammed the (metaphorical) cuffs on Damian Green. And it was fully half an hour later that Gordon Brown was told. Jacqui Smith didn't know yet because she was in Brussels. Even Boris Johnson knew by then. As for the Speaker? Well, it would only have upset him.