What a great roiling, boiling, mess of hysteria, hyperbole, pomposity and just plain idiocy! The Commons, always thrilled to the core when discussing itself, seemed to lose all sense of proportion when it debated the inquiry into the Damian Green arrest horror.  No sane person could keep up. The Speaker, who is being briefed against in public and private by any MP who happens to pass a microphone, became the hero of the hour as the government tried to change the rules for the inquiry he announced last week. All of which must have helped him in these difficult times. He could have been a dead man speaking. He certainly shouted "Order, order!" more firmly and loudly than usual. Douglas Hogg, Britain's best paid barrack-room lawyer, had arrived with a bundle of files fit for an eight-month fraud trial of unusual complexity. In the brief debate on the timetable, he accused Harriet Harman's deputy, Chris Bryant, of "bad faith". "I'm sure you don't want to question my good faith!" said Mr Bryant, to be greeted by a great rumble from the Tory benches which could be translated as "don't you be so sure, sunshine!" Mr Hogg continued, ferociously, his very nose seeming to tremble with outrage. Was it my imagination, or was he spraying flecked spittle of hatred? It must have been like sharing a shower with Roy Hattersley. "Mr Speaker, your three requirements have been frustrated by the government! We are entitled to ask why you are being frustrated!" The government kept on about its four principles. "They are concealment! Duplicity! Whitewash! And cover-up!" Passion spent, Mr Hogg collapsed back on the bench like a leaky bean bag. Frank Field tried, and naturally failed, to bring a moment of calm: "For us it is high drama, but for most of our constituents it has already descended into farce." "Pantomime," he added. Right on cue, Sir Nicholas Winterton stood up to compare the situation unfavourably with the parliament in Zimbabwe. MPs all wanted to speak for England. King Charles himself might have been at St Stephen's Entrance with a troop of pikemen. Richard Shepherd asked: "How can the House defend the freedoms and liberties of this country if we cannot defend the freedoms and liberties of this House? Why would anyone vote for a House that is worth nothing?" Bob Marshall-Andrews, the only MP who has gone on the record calling for the Speaker to resign, was called by that same Speaker. Labour MPs had been summoned to the packed chamber on, in effect, a three-line whip. "I hope many of my colleagues will ignore it," he said, to Tory cries of "Not a chance!" The debate proper began. Theresa May announced that if the government fixed itself a majority on the committee then it would not have the support of the opposition. This threat to boycott the whole thing would be perfect for the Tories, who can keep their anger bubbling for months. "Parliamentary privilege is not our privilege - it is the privilege of the people!" she declared, sounding like Tom Paine, or possibly Tony Blair. Andrew MacKinlay announced that he would be rebelling against his own side. "Leaks are meat and drink to me," he said. "Please send them on rice paper, so I can eat them!"  The government won, but by a breathtakingly narrow four votes. The Labour backbenchers who had chickened out had the grace to keep quiet, and even, in some cases, to look a little ashamed. And both Tories and Lib Dems are indeed planning to boycott the committee, so the whole thing really is a farce. Or Christmas pantomime.