After the flummery, the flannelling. The Queen, as she read out each leaden line through what sounded like a very tickly cold, gave the impression, even more than in previous years, that she had lost the will to live. The Speaker, by contrast, managed to stay alive another day. Just. The gist of his explanation to the Commons was that the dog had eaten his arrest warrant. He managed to stay just a few feet ahead of the pursuing pack by announcing a debate next week on the Damian Green arrest scandal. There is also to be an inquiry, by seven senior MPs whom he will choose. In other words, the Speaker's behaviour is to be investigated by a committee chosen by the Speaker. That's the way we do things here. It was an extraordinary day. As a flunkey bellowed "Mr Speaker!" every member sprang to his or her feet, for all the world as if he was the Queen. In a high, almost fluting voice he read out a statement, which had been printed up on plastic-coated paper, like the books children read in the bath.  The two sides began rival cheering and jeering, like football fans watching the score changing. The affair was a matter of grave concern, said the Speaker, and the Tories went "Yee-arrr!" their way of agreeing. But, he said, parliamentary privilege never meant that any MP was above the law, and it was Labour's turn to cheer. Mr Green sat behind David Cameron, looking fairly miserable. "The precincts of the House should not be a haven from the law," he went on, to more Labour cheers and at least one Tory cry of "Shame!" The police had explained the background to the sergeant-at-arms, Jill Pay (soon to be Jill "suspended on full" Pay, if the inquiry goes badly for her) without revealing the name of the member.  But they hadn't explained that, since they lacked a search warrant, she had a perfect right to stop them coming in. "That's an outrage!" yelled a Tory, giving a fairly credible imitation of someone being outraged. "I regret that consent was signed for by the sergeant-at-arms without consulting the clerk of the House ... I did not authorise the search," Mr Martin went on, neatly dropping an employee into the mire, or in his famous catchphrase, ordure, ordure!  Having established his fragrant blamelessness, to his own satisfaction at least, he took points of order. Michael Howard - not the most unifying figure in the House - was outraged (Tory cheers). John Reid said that the independence of the police had to be maintained (Tory mockery). Damian Green thanked the public for writing in his support (Labour groans).  Iain Duncan Smith assailed the Speaker for handing over the wording of next week's motion to the government, which was part of the problem. (Labour jeers, and, curiously, screeching). David Cameron devoted a large part of his speech to trying to find out what Gordon Brown's role in, or even his view of the whole affair - which had caused "nine anti-terrorism officers to enter [Mr Green's] home and reduce his family to tears". But the prime minister was far too wily to say anything at all on the matter. He will wait for the inquiry when, he will hope, the whole thing has died down. Over in the Upper House, Her Majesty had to wait for the Commons to attend upon her. Gordon Brown was at the front, and on TV we could see him haranguing David Cameron all the way. Damian Green was close behind, which was surprising, like seeing Captain Dreyfus feted on Bastille Day.  "The strength of the financial sector is vital for the future vibrancy of the economy," she intoned. "Proposals to create savings gateway accounts." As she got on to training days, a peer went "Urghhh!", probably a cough suppressed, possibly the sound of someone actually dying of boredom.