If soundbites were currency, there wouldn't be a problem. Our MPs have an enviable and endless capacity to generate witty barbs and snappy insults. If only we could export them. With the pound so low, we would be shipping daily container loads from Felixstowe. Take prime minister's question time yesterday. It preceded the emergency debate on Alistair Darling's plan. First up was Sir Peter Tapsell, grandest of all grandees.  Sir Peter has taken to quoting my words in his election addresses, so I feel I must offer something as thanks for the help he has given me. "Sir Peter is one of the seven wonders of the legislative world. He towers above the Commons like the statue of Zeus at Olympia." (Will that do, Sir Pete? No need for cash, but you could always buy me turbot and a bottle of Le Montrachet at Wiltons ...)  His appearance was met, as it always is, by a huge, billowing cheer - half ironic, half affectionate - from the Labour side. He paid tribute to the latest British soldier killed in action. He paused, at dramatic length. He resumed, majestically. "Since the chairman of the Woyal Bank of Scotland [Sir Peter has a slight speech impediment] has publicly apologised for wecking! His bank! Will the pwime minister apologise to the nation for wecking the Bwitish economy?" This time the huge cheer, and cries of "Resign!", came from the Tories. But Gordon Brown was ready. A week ago, he said, Sir Peter had demanded a boost for consumer spending, a cut in VAT and investment in public works (all of which the government did - or tried to do - on Monday). "He persuaded me, but he did not persuade his own frontbench!" Up in the VIP gallery Peter Mandelson was smiling. Usually when his lordship smiles we ask "what does he mean by that?" but this appeared to be a sincere smirk. Down on the floor, it was Labour MPs who cheered again. Sir Peter looked discomfited, or at least as a discomfited as a mighty effigy can ever look. David Cameron took over. He had assembled a larder full of soundbites, starting with jibes about the alleged 18.5% VAT rate planned for later. It was no "madcap idea", the Tory leader said. It had been signed off by the financial secretary to the Treasury, Stephen Timms. It was even on the internet. Labour MPs jeered. "There go the dinosaurs!" he said. (Later it turned out that Mr Timms had never seen the document. Of course not. I feel sure they keep tricky stuff from him.) By now soundbites were flying like ninja blades. Wheee! Cameron said Brown had given us "the debt levels of Italy with the accounting practices of Enron". Sweesh! "The country is going bankrupt, the prime minister has been found out, and the New Labour project is dead!"  But Mr Brown also had a Frisbee of death ready to fling. Zungg! "You are the do-nothing leader of a do-nothing party!" Labour loved that. But they were ecstatic a few minutes later when Brooks Newmark (a real MP and not a Sherlock Holmes villain) declared that only three countries in the developed world had a bigger deficit than us. "Can the prime minister name even one?" He replied with the word "America".  It was the ultimate sound-nibble, and it brought a massive surge of laughter. As I say, if we could sell the stuff abroad we'd be saved.