My colleague David McKie used to say that there ought to be a typeface called ironic bold. It is often hard to detect irony in print and all journalists get letters when we try it. I am sure that when Jonathan Swift wrote A Modest Proposal, he received loads of mail. "Dear Mr Swift, I am usually a great admirer of your work, but I was outraged by your suggestion that the problem of food shortages in Ireland could be solved by eating babies. I never thought I would read such an appalling notion in a book from a reputable publisher ... " It's a problem too for politicians, all of whom should use irony with great care. Take Phil Woolas, the immigration minister, who was allowed out to appear yesterday in front of the home affairs committee. (He was banned from Question Time by his boss, the home secretary, last month, because of fears that he would make a "gaffe" - political code for saying what he really thought.) Mr Woolas has said that the population of this country should not be allowed to rise above 70 million. This is not the government's view, especially if it would involve shovelling immigrants back on to boats. Keith Vaz, the committee's chairman, suggested that a cap on population growth would be impossible anyway, "unless the government is prepared to issue chastity belts". Mr Woolas deadpanned back: "We considered the political implications of that, and decided against it." Now, everyone in the room knew he was joking, just as he was a short while later when someone said that the Ministry of Defence had been dragging its feet over the matter of residence rights for Gurkhas. "I have never known the MoD drag its feet," Mr Woolas said, with a perfectly straight face. Denis Healey, when chancellor of the exchequer, once mused over lunch that if he could find a way of taxing sex, all his revenue-raising problems would be over. But of course no written record existed of that, so nobody had to take him seriously. But it would be so easy for chastity belts to become a hot issue. Some rightwing columnists would rage: "Is there nothing this nanny-state government will not do to interfere with our private lives?" Other rightists would take the opposite view. "Thank heavens for the refreshing common sense of minister Phil Woolas. The sooner we get every young woman into a chastity belt the sooner we will end the menace of teen pregnancy." Lefties would have other opinions. "This is an unprovoked assault on the rights of the poor and dispossessed, for whom sex is one of the few remaining affordable pleasures." Or: "At last, the government has taken a robust stand against one of the main causes of poverty and social exclusion!" Meanwhile, Mr Woolas would complain that it was all a joke. But nobody would be listening.