Here's a wonderfully barking example of the way the secrecy rules work in our government. The estimable Andrew MacKinlay, Labour MP for Thurrock and general troublemaker, this year tabled two questions asking who was the clerk to the parliamentary Intelligence and Security committee. Twice Gordon Brown flatly declined to answer. As MacKinlay put it the other day: "It upset me. I lay awake at night, and, trying to get to sleep, reached for the Civil Service Year Book where I noticed - and I shall say this in a whisper because it is top secret - the clerk is [he raised his voice] 'Emma-Louise Avery'!" So there it is, in a public, published publication. No doubt the editor of the Civil Service Yearbook will now be arrested under one of our multitudinous terrorism laws. • I bumped into another troublemaker on Thursday. Bob Marshall-Andrews MP told me he expects to be gone by May 2009 when, he predicts, Gordon Brown will call the election. "Every time the economic situation gets worse, his ratings go up. Well, we can do much more damage over the next few months!" • John Sergeant has been very popular with the public for some years now, but he only reached the status of National Treasure, along with the likes of Alan Bennett and Stephen Fry, when he started on Strictly Come Dancing. Sargie and I were political correspondents together for years, and he was especially hilarious during the two 1974 elections when we both had to cover Ted Heath, an easy target for pomposity-pricking and one whom neither of us felt any need to protect. His most famous moment came in 1990 when he stood on the steps of the British embassy in Paris after the first Tory leadership ballot. Bernard Ingham brushed his microphone aside as Margaret Thatcher stormed down the steps to announce she would fight on. The image has been on TV hundreds of times. A few years later he was chatting to her at a reception. She mentioned that she was finding pictures for her memoirs. "Is there one of me?" he asked, jokingly. "Why on earth should there be?" Lady Thatcher asked in genuine puzzlement, for her knowledge of popular culture is non-existent. On Strictly Come Dancing his performance, resembling that of a three-legged elephant, has charmed viewers who know  they could do no better - and it has undermined the whole programme. Or, at least, it has undermined the judges, who take it terribly seriously and don't realise that the show is one great, kitsch festival of camp. I really hope that he survives tonight. • And so to the British Museum for the Babylon: Myth and Reality exhibition. It is fascinating, though it must be said that there is more myth than reality since there is not much of Nebuchadnezzar's city left. Our notions of the place are as much dependent on the fanciful depictions of biblical stories: Daniel in the lion's den, Belshazzar's feast etc. (I didn't know that Mene Mene Tekel Upharsin is basically just a list of weights, as if the writing on the wall had been "ounce, ounce, pound and two bits" which can, just, be interpreted as "thou hast been weighed in the balance and found wanting".) The great glazed dragons and lions are sensational and some of the paintings are wondrous. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, artists depicted the Tower of Babel as a sort of circular multistorey car park, though it seems more likely to have been square. And it may be the only exhibition ever at the museum to include, because of their hit By the Rivers of Babylon, a Boney M record sleeve. • The battle against wind turbines continues. Eddie Gibbs writes from Lewes, Sussex, about the appalling attempt by the owners of Glyndebourne to erect a 240ft-high turbine on the South Downs, officially an area of outstanding natural beauty. Hazel Blears, the relevant minister has, astonishingly, approved it - no doubt because of the government's obsession with meaningless targets. The fact that wind turbines mostly produce a piddling amount of electricity is irrelevant to the people who build them, since they can sell the stuff to the natinal grid for well over the market price. It would be a win-win game for them even if only gentle zephyrs played across the downs all year. Meanwhile, Glyndebourne is one of the glories of our national culture. How ghastly that the people who run it should attempt to save our environment by wrecking one of its loveliest parts. • The Royal Society of Chemistry has produced its recipe for failsafe Yorkshire puddings. Not really necessary, I think - with Yorkshires, whatever your mother did is probably best, and even if you did have the perfect recipe there are so many variables it can easily go wrong. I love Yorkshires; they are the perfect comfort food, especially with gallons of gravy. We have them with lamb, pork and chicken as well as beef.  For what it's worth, my recipe is much the same as everyone else's: 3oz plain flour, 5 fl oz milk and water mixed, salt and an egg, all whizzed up. Except that I add an extra egg white, which usually makes them stand up tall but lopsided, like a drunk's opera hat.  • Thanks for your many offerings of mad Christmas presents from catalogues. Keep them coming, and we'll have a bumper selection next month. Meanwhile, how about a tissue box with an Easter Island statue on the front, so you can pull the tissue out of his nose? You can buy for &pound;14.99 a jokey "condiment gun"; when you pull the trigger it sprays ketchup or mustard. With the Maggie T nutcracker (&pound;9.99) you place the nut between her legs and squeeze. For only &pound;54.99 you can buy a solid silver lid for your Marmite pots. Astonishingly, the flying alarm clock - it doesn't just ring but takes off and whirls round the bedroom until you catch it - is a mere &pound;16.95, batteries not included.