I have written before about the menace of secondary Prescott - the contagion that makes members of parliament sound like our former deputy prime minister. Otherwise normal people begin to gabble, swallow words, repeat themselves, confuse definite with indefinite articles, ramble unchecked, and altogether sound like a bad-tempered bull in the Meissen factory. Yesterday we discovered a new sufferer. He is the Labour MP for Ogmore Huw Irranca-Davies (clearly the preacher had a coughing fit during his baptism, but since his parents possibly belonged to a fundamentalist sect, they believed it would be in defiance of God to change his name back to the one they had planned). Mr Irranca-Davies is a new under-secretary at the environment department, and yesterday was his first trip to the dispatch box. He was replying to a question from my old chum Michael Fabricant, who had asked about the extension of broadband services to rural areas. Here was Mr Irranca-Davies's reply, as transcribed from my digital recorder. I have inserted very little punctuation because he himself included almost none.  "Well, the hon gentleman makes among other things a very good point and he and I served together in debates on the communications bill quite some time ago when these issues were raised with the original roll-out of broadband among other things and what I can assure him that issue of 'not-spots' which are an issue in Wales and England are being tackled not least by CLA and Defra, research which we are taking forward also, coming up what I always call the 'ciao' review but the Caio review, looking at this issue of how we extend it market-driven but also how we fill in those market failures, so what government can do as well, but also what regional development authorities can do, but also what local authorities can do!"  He finished triumphantly: "It is an issue that needs to be addressed and I am committed to doing that." I expected him to get a round of applause for this feat - there was no sign that he had drawn breath once - though MPs on all sides seem to regard it as perfectly normal. Perhaps they weren't listening. In fact, the whole answer boiled down to "we're seeing what can be done about the problem", but expressed with so much brio and flair. I would also like to pay tribute to the lads and lasses at Hansard who, within three hours of Mr Irranca-Davies speaking, had got a version of his reply into the English language and up on their website. It's much shorter than his actual words, but it makes an awful lot more sense. The secretary of state, Hilary Benn, also had hot news for us. He has appointed Dame Suzi Leather as chair of the council of food policy advisers. I was excited to learn this so close to Christmas, because Dame Suzi Leather sounds exactly like a pantomime character. I envisaged her, perhaps played by Robbie Coltrane, in a vast leather dress with two footballs down his front, a bonnet the size of an ostrich and red spotted socks.  Sadly, a quick Google reveals that she is a perfectly normal looking member of the great and the good, and rather handsome - as far from an ugly sister as you can imagine.