Home Office questions threw up some bizarre moments yesterday. Sir Nicholas Winterton called for "harsher" penalties against young hoodlums. Antisocial behaviour was, he said, a serious matter. It should be treated a bit more harshly and a bit more transparently. Nothing unusual there, you might think. Sir Nicholas's mindset is, in Alexander McCall Smith's phrase, "traditionally built". He harks back to a past age when Tory backbenchers called for the return of the birch and capital punishment - possibly both. Miscreants could be flogged to within an inch of their lives and then hanged, or in less serious cases, the other way round. But this is 2008, and Sir Nicholas seems to have softened over the years. What was his recipe for tearaways and scofflaws? "They should be set to removing graffiti, removing chewing gum, and picking up litter!" he said. You could almost hear the rumbling as Tory knights of the shires rolled in their mausoleums. Picking up litter? Scraping off chewing gum? What did their wraiths imagine Sir Nicholas had in mind? "Get these vandals out of bed at 10 and set 'em to scrub those walls!" perhaps. "They don't like the taste of cold Brillo pad!" Or, "I don't think they'll be terrorising old ladies once they've tried lifting a few blobs of chewing gum with a garden scraper! A couple of hours of that and you might see a change of attitude!"  "They won't be so keen to rip up train seats once they've picked up a few Coke tins and burger boxes - and had to throw them in a black plastic bag! It's the only language these young thugs understand ..." So that was weird enough. Then it got stranger. Norman Baker, a Lib Dem, took up the cause of protesters at the Kingsnorth climate camp in Kent in August. They had been the subject of overzealous police action, he said. He had been told of officers confiscating items including "toilet rolls, board games and clown costumes". He wanted an inquiry. David Drew (Labour, Stroud) said a constituent of his had been arrested at Kingsnorth for "aggressively picking up litter." I was reminded of the Not the Nine O'Clock News sketch about Constable Savage, carpeted by his superior for arresting a man for "loitering with intent to use a pedestrian crossing", "smelling of foreign food" and "wearing a loud shirt in the hours of darkness".  One wonders how the police were debriefed after the Kingsnorth ructions. "Constable Savage, I see you have seized several dozen rolls of toilet paper. Might I inquire why?" "Yuss, sir. I apprehended the toilet roll before it could be thrown, creating a potential hazard for my colleagues." "Did it not occur to you, Savage, that they might have needed the toilet paper - to wipe their bottoms?"  "No, sir, being tree-hugging types I assumed they used leaves and grass for that purpose, sir!" "Board games. Now why did you confiscate those?" "Because they were in possession of metal irons, top hats, boots and cannon, sir." "You blithering idiot, Savage, they were playing Monopoly. Every one of those things was half an inch long and could only have harmed a police officer if he had shoved it up his own nose! And what, in God's name, is the penalty for "offensively picking up litter"? "Obviously, sir, picking up litter, like Sir Nicholas Winterton says.