We are, apparently, about to mark the 150th anniversary of the gin and tonic. I don't know how they know these things; I don't suppose that whoever invented it put a notice in the "births" column. Still, it's a chance to celebrate the most perfect of all mixed drinks.  There is nothing in the world more refreshing than a g&amp;t, even on a cold day. It's what I always ask for at the start of long plane journeys - however tedious the prospect may be, the hit of the gin, the ice and the pick-me-up tonic makes the prospect of six hours in a seat designed for a contortionist gnome seem almost tolerable. I find two g&amp;t's doubles the effect.  Everyone has their favourite. I like a new gin, Hendrick's, which is not cheap but has a dry, cucumber flavour. With most other gins I prefer a slice of orange to lemon. There's a lot of snobbery around the tonic. Obviously not diet tonic, which tastes like the effluent from a nuclear power station.  Some people insist on prestige tonics, such as Fever-Tree, which I like well enough but is a little understated. For a real wallop you still need Schweppes. Some people say you should mix the drink half and half, though I think one part gin to two of tonic is more agreeable. You require a flat-bottomed tumbler and loads of ice, which doesn't dilute the drink as each cube helps keep the others frozen. Years ago I was in what was still Rhodesia, waiting for Joshua Nkomo to address a rally. He was hours late. The sun beat down and there was no shade whatever. I began describing to my colleagues the ideal, Platonic g&amp;t and evoked the clinking of the ice, the oily swirl of the gin, the faint blue blush of the tonic, and the beads of condensation on the glass. I am amazed I got out alive.  My punishment later was that overnight the instant tan on my face peeled off like pork crackling, leaving the thin, wan skin underneath. • To Cheltenham for the literary festival. As I keep saying, cheap pleasures sell well in a recession, and for the first time ever they had sold 100,000 tickets - not at all bad for a 10-day festival. For instance, you could hear Michael Frayn speak for a small fraction of what you'd fork out to see one of his plays. He talked about Copenhagen, the one about Heisenberg and Niels Bohr, set obviously in the Danish capital. It was also called Copenhagen there (over the objections of their queen - can you imagine ours showing an interest in the title of anything but a horse race?) and he had been deeply moved by the production. The contrast with the German production was total. Frayn is a Germanophile, but, he said, most German theatres play the classics and little else, so the only way a director can make his name is by imposing his own original, sometimes bonkers vision.  So Copenhagen was, grotesquely, set in a circus, with high wire cyclists and Heisenberg doing four somersaults - not metaphorical, but literal. "Much of the play is long conversations about physics, politics and morality. Whenever one of them began, the actress playing Mrs Bohr would start hammering at an old typewriter, so loud that the audience couldn't hear a word. I suppose the director thought it was very boring." • I'm puzzled by the poster that atheists, inspired by Richard Dawkins and his book The God Delusion, have paid to put on the sides of London buses. Apparently so many people have sent money they can plaster the message on loads of them. (I wonder if devout people will refuse to ride on one, even if it's the last bus home.) Anyhow, the poster reads: "There's probably no God. Now stop worrying and enjoy your life." That's not atheism, it's agnosticism. But Dawkins tells us, quite angrily, that agnosticism is not an option. It's a cop-out. Saying "I'm not sure" is a lazy way of failing to face up to the real truth - there is no God, any more than there is a teapot in close orbit round the sun. So it's as if the Catholic church ran posters saying: "Artificial contraception might on balance be a bad idea", or the Wee Frees said: "You will spend eternity in the fires of hell. Possibly." • I was sorry to see Levi Stubbs, the lead singer with the Four Tops, had died. I really thought they were the greatest of all Motown groups, better even than the Temptations, more thrilling than the Supremes, finer even than the Miracles, who were basically Smokey Robinson with backing singers. My favourite was their first big hit, Baby I Need Your Loving, in which Stubbs's voice, piercing and high, yet as thick and rich as a bottle of Madeira, soared up in a great cry of pain and yearning. I saw them once, at the Albert Hall. The singing was incredible, but the stage presence rather naff. They wore sharp, shiny suits, and waved their legs alternately, more or less in unison, like not very good synchronised singers. I suppose the contrast was meant to be with the popular white groups of the time, such as the Stones, whose image was wild and undisciplined. But the sound - it has never been matched.