Yesterday in the Commons a star was born. For MP-spotters it was exciting. We were like astronomers finding a new comet. Unfortunately, it already has a name, so I can't call Mr Chris Bryant "Hoggart-Bopp", but he blazed pretty brightly. Until last month Mr Bryant, Labour MP for Rhondda, was something of a parliamentary joke. A former vicar, he was best known for posing in his knickers on a gay website. Then he was made deputy leader of the house, which makes him Harriet Harman's understrapper. Yesterday she was off sick, or had been "struck down by the lurgy," as Mr Bryant put it. (The term comes from The Goon Show. A while ago we used it in our community panto. "Where's the fairy godmother?" one of the witches asked. "She's in bed with the dreaded lurgy," was the reply. "Oh, I don't know, I quite like Italian men myself," the witch said.) Yesterday he was poised, calm and confident. He appeared to have a complete mastery not only of his own brief (no, not briefs, don't be stupid) but of everyone else's as well. Facts, judgments and statistics - some possibly true - poured out, and he didn't have a single note. Sometimes he was ferocious and party-political, sometimes ameliorative. He clearly loved being at the dispatch box, the centre of attention. I bet he did great sermons, even when fully clothed. He was helped by having the regular Tory shadow, Theresa May, up against him. Mrs May has that problem which vexes some politicians: she doesn't really hear what she is saying. Yesterday, for instance, she accused the government of "railroading the transport bill". Well, you would, wouldn't you? She might as well complain that the government had guillotined the bill on capital punishment, stonewalled a gay rights amendment, or filibustered the bill to help bankrupt horse breeders. She went on to complain about negative growth and recession. Mr Bryant said how nice it was to hear her and all her usual lines. "I have now heard her peroration 27 times, and it's very good to hear it again." His art was to shoot back at party political points, to be helpful to serious inquiries, and to flannel like mad on anything embarrassing. Many Tory MPs were furious that Harriet had arranged things so that there would be no discussion of abortion in the debate on the human fertility bill this week. Mr Bryant evaded them as easily as a rugby winger covered in pig grease. Home repossessions came up and he seemed to know all about what the master of the rolls was up to about those. Someone asked about his local hospital, and he gravely promised to pass his thoughts to the health secretary. Peter Bone hinted that Ms Harman was throwing a sickie, and was actually planning to resign. Mr Bryant said crossly that what he had told the house about the lurgy was true. Mrs May kept talking about regulation and he accused her of "chuntering" - not a line you often hear from dispatch box or pulpit. Altogether a deft, sure-footed, Strictly Come Dancing performance. If the lurgy-struck Ms Harman was watching it, she might be somewhat worried.