Prime minister's questions yesterday were ostensibly about the economy. In fact the session was about George Osborne. The shadow chancellor, shiny and glistening as always, arrived to a supportive cheer from his own side - plus some mockery from Labour.  He sat down on the bench and did what all politicians in his position are hard-wired to do - he smiled, chuckled and chatted to the chap next to him. The message is: "Anything you say about me is just a joke, and I can laugh it off! Ha, ha!" Isn't it revealing that these people, folk such as Osborne and Lord Mandelson, are supposed to be deadly political rivals, but are really dear, dear friends?  We wouldn't have heard anything about this if Osborne hadn't shopped Mandelson after their meal at a &pound;50 a head taverna on Corfu. (Where do you find a &pound;50 a head taverna in Greece? Most people expect to pay &euro;20 tops for a lavish meal, including all the retsina your stomach can stand. It's like finding a fifty-quid Burger King.) Choosing between these people and their ludicrously wealthy friends is as pointless as picking your favourite Kray twin, or deciding if you prefer George Osborne to Ozzy Osbourne. Gordon Brown got off to a bad start. He declared that the global crisis was creating recession in the US, Europe and Japan. "And - because no country can insulate itself from it - Britain too." The notion that we were unlucky to be sucked into this problem, which normally wouldn't have affected us, dear me no, had the Tories laughing maniacally.  The prime minister resembled someone who, hearing a hurricane is on the way, prudently packs an umbrella and is baffled when he still gets wet. David Cameron persisted in blaming him, and our national debt, for the pickle we are in. He has of course offered to help the government to get out of the hole we are all in, but is desperately anxious that everyone should realise who dug the hole in the first place. Then the Tory leader made his own mistake.  "He cannot lecture the banks on borrowing because he's been borrowing so much, and he cannot lecture them on transparency because he has been hiding so much." Hiding? Labour members thought this was a perfect opportunity to remind everyone about Mr Osborne, to whom they pointed and waved their arms. "He is the master of dodgy accounting!" shouted Mr Cameron, which delighted them yet more. The Tory leader switched tactics. He asked the prime minister to admit that he had not, as billed so often and so long, ended boom and bust. He asked him many times.  Did he imagine that Brown would break down and whimper, "Yes, you're right, I have failed the nation. I shall go to a quiet room with a service revolver and a bottle of ouzo"? The prime minister ignored the question. Then we heard from Dennis Skinner, the old sea-green incorruptible, the last of the leftwing samurai. Mr Skinner resembles a Japanese soldier who, discovered in the jungle years after hostilities have ceased, tells the rescue party that he knows the war is over, but he doesn't care and will go on fighting anyway. "Will the prime minister give a rock-solid assurance that whatever he does to clear the nation's debts, he will never, ever meet a Russian billionaire and try to cadge the money? We will leave that to the sleazy Tory party!" he declared. He waved an angry arm. Normally Mr Skinner is greeted by an indulgent smile which means "dear old Dennis, what a character!"  But Gordon Brown just grunted and said: "This is a very serious matter, and I hope it will be investigated by the authorities." Quite what there is to investigate isn't entirely clear.  "Tories try to tap rich man for moolah; fail" is not quite Watergate yet, though plenty of people - some of them Tories - are hoping that it will be.