It was like listening to a dour Scottish dominie lecturing his pupils on the virtues of thrift. It didn't work as well as it might, because the kids can see the Porsche parked at the back and they heard about the fortnight in the Maldives. But that didn't stop him. The prime minister began his statement on the European council meeting with a return to the old, careful, cautious Gordon - the Gordon we knew before he started spending money like a man who knows the bank is about to collapse and he might as well have a good time while he still can. Prudence was again at his elbow, possibly like the school matron with a bottle of something unpleasant for obstreperous boys. We needed a return to hard work, enterprise, and responsible risk taking - not irresponsibility and excess, he told us. He demanded transparency, integrity, responsibility, sound banking and international governance. It sounded most impressive, and very Presbyterian, right up to the moment that he called for openness: "Off-balance vehicles [metaphorical vehicles, that is, not the Porsche] must go back on to balance sheets!" The Tories collapsed in laughter because the whole thrust of their argument against the dominie is that his magical debt statistics (we are allegedly less in debt than almost any other country - yeah, right) are based entirely on keeping as much moolah as possible away from the balance sheets. For him to make this stern demand was as ludicrous in its way as Peter Mandelson calling for an end to spin, or Boris Johnson insisting that we all use styling gel. The prime minister was clearly discommoded by this laughter - when you are going around the world claiming to have single-handedly rescued the entire global financial system, you expect a bit of respect and don't quite know how to cope when it isn't there. He stumbled. "We need a rabbit!" he announced. The Tories collapsed again. Was this his cunning plan - a rabbit out of the hat? And would a rabbit be enough? Surely we needed to pull a massive Highland stag out of a hat. "A rabbit!" he repeated. "Er, a rapid return to internationally agreed standards!" David Cameron was torn between statesmanlike mode, standing shoulder to shoulder with the government to save our economy, and cheeking the teacher. He finished by settling for the latter - record deficit, no growth, heading into recession with a completely bare cupboard. It's much easier to be bipartisan while you're comfortably ahead in the polls; harder when your once reviled opponent is doing slightly better. The dominie replied with his own statistics, doubtless equally fictitious, or at least equally irrelevant to our problems. He listed several steps he had taken which the Tories had opposed - including one or two which they hadn't opposed at all, which infuriated them. "They don't like it up 'em!" chortled one Labour MP, with more enthusiasm than originality.   At the end we heard from Sir Peter Tapsell, who rose majestically to lecture the dominie on his multitudinous shortcomings. "Did he explain to the Euwopean council [Sir Peter has a slight speech impediment] that his misjudgment was wesponsible for the fact that his FSA failed to supervise AIG in London's Mayfair ... default credit documents ... AIG ... almost evewy bank in the world thweatened with bankwupcy." Sir Peter rather spoiled the magnificent effect by talking for wather, sorry rather, too long and the dominie flipped him aside by pointing out that AIG is an insurance company, not a bank, which didn't answer the question, but bought him a few moments of time until the bell rang.