Who would be a teacher? Yesterday the schools secretary, Ed Balls, made a statement about testing which was - to almost any layman - impenetrable and as stuffed with jargon as a whole pack of Paxo in a Christmas turkey. Yet it was immediately praised by MPs for its "clarity of principle and intellectual rigour". Heaven knows what it would have been like if it had been marked by obscurantism and intellectual sloth. Lines such as "Making Good Progress pilots" (Mr Balls likes to talk in capital letters) whizzed past our ears. "We are currently piloting 'stage not age' single level tests," he told us. We heard about "random sampling of particular cohorts".  At one point Mr Balls said that to get the reforms right, he would be working closely "with our social partners, to take them forward without unnecessarily adding to teacher workload". I wasn't sure who social partners were (drinking companions? Freemasons? The Castleford Ladies Coven?), but he made it sound as if adding unnecessarily to teacher workload was something perfectly routine. There had simply been a change of policy. I suspect many teachers would heartily agree that for many years adding unnecessarily to their workload was an important part of government strategy. Mr Balls must be a sad man these days. He was Gordon Brown's dearest friend for many years. Now it appears that he has been supplanted by Peter Mandelson. We all know that there is no relationship stronger than an enmity which has since turned into a friendship. Poor Mr Balls, once permanently at the premier's right hand, is now fretting about school testing regimes while the reviled Mandelson parades in scarlet and ermine, looking as pleased and at home as he might at a fancy dress party. Mr Balls was telling us that he was going to reform "the current key stage 3 testing regime in secondary schools." In English, this meant that he was going to abolish the tests for 14-year-olds. It follows the - ahem - balls-up this year when the American company ETS failed to mark the papers. Apparently some schools haven't got their results yet. Now not only has ETS been fired, but the government claims to have got &pound;24.1m back from them. The house sighed with mild pleasure, though of course they would far rather have heard about a banker in red braces and a striped shirt having his &pound;2m bonus burned, in cash, in front of him while he swung from the rafters with a meat hook through his nostrils. (Sorry if that sounds bloodthirsty, but I simply report the mood.) There would be "school report cards", so that parents would know how their schools were doing and the public would know how the government was performing. I toyed with the idea that bad schools would try to hide their reports. Principals would say: "I regret to inform parents that the dog ate it." Michael Gove, the Tory shadow, was all in favour of abolishing the tests for teens. He quoted some questions in the science paper: "What part of a rider's body does a riding hat protect?" was one.  He too praised Mr Balls for his "clarity". Was he grateful? No. "He would have failed to get to level 4 at key stage 2 with that reply on comprehension," he told him. Mr Balls was clearly in churlish mood.