MPs brought the power of God's word to deal with the financial crisis yesterday. But we also welcomed back Michael Fabricant from his Latin American hell. Chris Bryant, a new minister who is Harriet Harman's deputy, said how glad we all were that the Colombian police had released him so that he could be with us yesterday. I was abroad myself when the terrible events unfolded, but it appears that Mickey had been visiting the anarchic nation. Not trusting the local milk, he took with him a jar of Coffee-mate, a white powder which turns black coffee to a sludgy brown. Frankly, I'd rather drink milk squeezed from a diseased nanny goat but it takes all sorts.  At some point a policeman saw the jar and decided it must be full of cocaine. Officers surrounded him and his friend, pointing their guns aggressively. "Cocaine, cocaine!" they shouted. "No, coffee, coffee!" he shouted back. There was only one way out. He had to eat quantities of the powder to prove it was harmless. The effect was, naturally to make him very ill, though not dead, which he would have been if it actually had been cocaine. I found the story highly evocative. The broiling South American sun gleaming off the gun barrels and glinting from Mickey's hair-style substance! The officers, with their swarthy, moustachioed faces! The member for Lichfield, once a successful disc jockey, choking as he tries to force down another spoonful as it sprays around his face. Surely it was a subject worthy of the canvas of a Goya! And failing that why did nobody take a picture on their mobe? Before then we had questions on the church. The church commissioner, Stuart Bell, was quite excited because in three years' time we celebrate the 400th anniversary of the King James Bible or authorised version - one of the finest pieces of writing in our language. Planning is advanced. According to Bell, in 2001 we will all "break into joy and sing together" (Isaiah 52.v.8). Tony Baldry, who raised the matter, linked it to the financial turbulence. "In these troubled times it is worth recalling one phrase from the King James Bible: 'The grass withereth and the flower fadeth away, but the word of the Lord endureth forever'." That should steady the markets! Of course most MPs assumed that by "the Lord" he probably meant the future Lord Mandelson, who is expected to take his seat in the Upper House any day. Bell said that copies of the KJB would be distributed to children, including a new "green bible", a prospect that made Sir Patrick Cormack groan. And you can see why.  The bible is specific on environmental matters. According to Genesis, God made us in His image so we could have "dominion" over all living things. And we should "subdue" the earth, which doesn't sound very Greenpeace to me. And as for those animal sacrifices and pillars of fire popping up everywhere, what kind of carbon footprint did they leave?