I get the modern world!' said David Cameron, and that was the message of his speech. It's not a claim that Sir Alec Douglas-Home would have made, but then I don't recall him groping Lady Home after his conference speech either. Samantha Cameron was not so lucky. She was pulled on stage looking nervous. This was perhaps why she got several smackers on the lips, a definite snoggerama, plus innumerable strokes of the tummy which, so far as we know, does not currently contain another Cameron baby.  But there was something erotic in the air. He told us he understood entrepreneurs. "I go to bed with one every night," he said. Mrs Cameron sells, among other things, upmarket notebooks. In Blackpool he could have reprised Donald McGill's joke - Man in shop: Do you keep stationery, miss? Assistant: Well, sometimes I wiggle about a bit. So fevered did her husband apparently become that I wanted to shout "get a room!", though it wouldn't have been heard as Let's Work Together boomed out - another innovation of which earlier grandees might not have approved. The conference had moved to the vast Symphony Hall to hear Dave, and the audience - some of whom had been queueing for three hours - was seething with excitement. I thought some of them might pop. But at first he didn't give them many applause lines. When he wanted a clap, he paused and scrunched his eyes up. The scrunch, visible on the big screen, was the signal for dutiful clapping. Then they warmed up. They loved his line about experience. Experience was the excuse always used by incumbents through the ages. Jim Callaghan had had plenty of experience.  "But thank God we changed him for Margaret Thatcher!"  "If we listened to this argument about experience ... we'd have Gordon Brown as prime minister, for ever!" As they laughed, he added, "I'm not going to go on - there are people in balconies up there!" The biggest cheer of all came when he talked about a man who had watched his wife die in hospital in circumstances too awful to describe. He had sent the letter on to the health secretary, whose staff sent back a reply full of chilly bureaucratese.  "Four ways to make a complaint, not one way for my constituent's wife to die with dignity. God, we've got to change all that!"  The conference, many of whom are beginning to fret about that very topic, gave him huge applause.  Also, previous Tory leaders never publicly invoked the deity, even to express strong emotion. There were tricky bits, like the suggestion that prison doesn't always work. "Come with me to Wandsworth prison, and meet the inmates," he said, and I wondered what the prison officers would think if the entire Tory conference descended upon them. Nor were they entirely happy about "aspiration for the poor and the marginalised". Whoever joined the Tory party to worry about them? Then another phrase that never dropped from the lips of Margaret Thatcher: "we won't bottle it when things get tough." But being very expensively educated, at least he pronounced both ts.  Then it was over and he scurried off in a lift with Samantha. We were not told where.