It was the best speech David Cameron has ever made. It had weight, gravitas and real content. Of course it was as sodden with political calculation as a rich tea biscuit under Niagara Falls, but the great art of such a speech is to appear above politics while scrapping like a maniac for political advantage. The Tory leader was making his bid for a government of national unity, in which he will stand alongside the prime minister. He will join this great statesman to heal our wounded nation and restore our sick economy.  Together they will bring us to uplands so sunlit they will make the meadow in Millais's The Blind Girl - one of the great attractions in the Birmingham art gallery - look like a sink estate in the rain. This afternoon, when the Tory leader makes his main conference speech, Gordon Brown will have became a figure of ridicule, hatred and contempt, as fit to run our country as Victor Meldrew with the PG Tips chimps as his cabinet. But for one day only he was invited to join Team Tory to work together, for us, for our country, for the future, for our children (fill in your own vague aspiration here). Mr Cameron marched on stage, impromptu and almost unheralded. He thrashed his face into an expression of anguished concern. He was trying to out-grim George Osborne and almost succeeded. People were worried about their jobs, their mortgages, their savings, their pensions. He had a solution for getting out of the mess, and will tell us what it is today. In the meantime, he said, we must not let anger cloud our judgment. This was the tricky bit: how to blame the bankers without blaming the free market system which they appear to be testing to destruction. He answered in two parts: (1) they must pay for their evil misdeeds. (2) But not yet. "There will be a day of reckoning, but today is not that day!" I rather hoped he would tell us what the day would be - February 23, 2011, for example.  Then the cunning sleight of hand. "We cannot allow what happened in America to happen here." In other words, unlike those pesky Republicans, we will not play party politics. But the system is different here. Gordon Brown has far more power over Britain than George Bush has over America.  He can do what he likes! He doesn't need David Cameron. Even if he came up with some entirely hare-brained scheme, such as paying public sector workers in Tesco club card points, he could get it through the Commons. Mr Cameron told us that the Tories agreed with the government that there had to be new legislation to rescue failing banks. They only disagreed about who should decide to use it. "I can announce today that we are prepared to drop our objection to allow rapid and safe passage of the bill!" He made the bill sound like Lenin in the sealed train speeding towards Moscow. The fact is that Labour could get it through even if next week the Tories decided to go on holiday to the Maldives while they've still got any money.