Gosh, George Osborne was shiny. Shiny suit, shiny tie, shiny shoes, shiny face. He radiated inner shininess. But he was also grim. Grim but shiny, a bit like Balsall Heath on a sunny day. He didn't smile once. Every time they applauded he looked more stern and unbending.  They said of one Tory MP that his smile was like the silver plate on a coffin. The shadow chancellor's frown was more like a bloodstain on a Christmas cracker. He was beginning to sound like Alistair Darling, who also believes that things can only get grimmer. The message for the Tory conference was: "We're all doomed! Well, fairly doomed - doomed up to a point." But having told us that everything was as bad as it could be, he finished on a note of mad optimism. "A hard road lies ahead of us. But that hard road leads over the horizon!" No time to ponder what that might conceivably mean, though I thought he might be about to change into a gingham frock and sing Over The Rainbow. We knew things were desperate because he had assembled a vast collection of soundbites to hurl at the problem. "The government is all crisis, and no confidence ... Gordon Brown is the candidate of experience. He's going to find that we've all had quite enough of the Gordon Brown experience ... the message to Gordon Brown from the British people is 'Stop! Go!'" In case we felt he'd not produced substance, he referred to the Tories' leaflet on saving the economy. This is a 40-page document in minuscule type and is impossible to read, like the terms and conditions that come with your credit card, or DVD instructions translated from Japanese by a Swahili speaker. He can be confident very few people will have any idea what's in it. This makes it the ideal political document. But as well as soundbites, Mr Osborne likes to give the conference a delicious sound-mouthful, a political Cadbury's Creme Egg to stuff in their faces. He loves that great wave of applause. It allows him to respond by looking even more grim. Last year it was the reduction in inheritance tax which installed him as Official Conference Darling. Yesterday he promised a two-year freeze on council tax rises. They gasped before they cheered. This from a party that demands more local autonomy. The message from the conference: "Let local people take local decisions! Provided it doesn't cost us!" (Actually, a weasly bit came later. "Every council that takes part ..." he said. So it's an optional freeze. Like optional taxes, that's quite a risk.) He began his speech by saying that the British people wanted answers to two questions: "Are you up to it? And will you make a difference?" We waited with bated tenterhooks to discover the answers. Apparently they are up to it, and they will make a difference! The conference could relax. Until we got on to the doomy bit. "The credit has dried up. The party is over ... rock-solid banks are blown over like trees." If that wasn't enough, if there was anyone cheerful left in the hall, he had more. The cupboard was bare. There was no more money. Borrowing was out of control. "Labour has done it again!"  They hadn't fixed the roof when the sun was shining. But last week Gordon Brown insisted that's when they had fixed the roof. They were beginning to sound like rival cowboy builders. "Blimey, who done that roof for you? Worra bodged job ..." He ended to a standing ovation, and still shiny, but terminally grim, disappeared stage left.