Alistair Darling unleashed upon us the power of positive pessimism. Things were terrible, the chancellor told us. The only good news was this: things are better now than they will be soon. It was all perfectly dreadful. We faced tough challenges, unprecedented problems, extraordinary and turbulent times. Financial institutions on their knees. Crises ... shocks to the system ... nothing would ever be the same again. People wondering if they would be in work, and how they could ever pay the bills. Families reduced to eating their own children to save on school uniforms. (I made that up, but it does catch the general mood.) He reminded us how morose he had always been. Britain led the world in gloom. "I've made headlines by saying just how tough times are. I draw little comfort from the fact that many people now understand what I meant." It was like being at Eeyore's birthday party.  However, he said, he did want to offer reassurance. He said it twice. "I want to explain and to reassure." I fear that politicians saying "I want to reassure you" is up there with "the cheque is in the post", and "of course I'll phone you in the morning". You want to hear it, but you don't really believe it. The conference didn't quite know how to cope with all this. They're used to the chancellor gloating about how wonderful everything is, and how they live in an Elysium created by Gordon Brown. Being warned that the government's new housing programme might involve cardboard boxes isn't what they expect to hear.  Consequently, the clap lines only started when he attacked the Tories. That's what they want to hear. In some mysterious way, the Tories were to blame for the whole disaster. He did finish with some spray-on optimism. "We should have confidence in ourselves. And confidence in the future." But he sounded as if he was recommending mass suicide as a practical way of facing the crisis. Ah well, as Mona Lott said on ITMA, it's being so cheerful that keeps him going. The conference gave him a standing ovation, mainly, I suspect, because they felt so sorry for him.  By contrast, the foreign secretary, David Miliband, was almost a happy bunny. Labour was going to win a fourth term "and prove the fatalists wrong!" Mr Miliband was never going to attack Gordon Brown, and certainly not in any way that could be deciphered without an Enigma machine, though conceivably the line "an age of massive change needs leadership from the party of change" might have a subliminal effect by putting the word "change" twice into the same sentence as "leadership". No, he was buying brownie points. He praised the prime minister for the world ban on cluster munitions, then at one point flung an arm in the general direction of his boss and said, with every semblance of genuine passion, "Gordon, it's not just about politics. You have transformed the debate about international development in Britain, and we should take inspiration from that!" I was reminded of a Chinese dissident at a show trial during the Cultural Revolution, dementedly praising Chairman Mao before being taken away to be shot.