Albert Pierrepoint, Britain's best known executioner, could hang a man within eight seconds of meeting him. He would shake his hand, turn it into a half nelson, push him towards the trap - then hood, rope, drop. The weeks of dread would be ended with brief moments of terror. It would be kind to finish off Gordon Brown the same way. But if this cabinet were actually trying to hang a man they'd lack Pierrepoint's humane efficiency. "Now, let me see, where did I put that hood? I'll be forgetting my own head next - silly me! Now, I wonder if this is really the right time. Shall I come back in half an hour? Or shall we have some coffee while we think it over?" Certainly poor Mr Brown does look rather like a man who's been too long in the condemned cell, waiting for a reprieve. Interviewed on Andrew Marr's programme yesterday he adopted the Theseus defence: I got you into this mess, but thanks to my magic thread, I am the only man who can get you out of it. He even invoked his old school motto once again, "Always do your utmost". But who ever had a school motto which was "Relax, it'll probably be all right"?  You can tell he's under strain because he produces the famous rictus grin, reminiscent of the Joker in Batman, except that the Joker does it when one of his evil schemes goes right, and Gordon does it when one of his incompetent schemes goes wrong.  Marr: You always seem to have somebody else to blame. Prime minister: [horrible smile] (Even now he seems to lack a sense of urgency.) Marr: What can be done? Prime minister: The Financial Services Authority is looking at it. Back in the conference hall, the delegates seem not so much in denial as numb. Their reactions seem dreadfully slow, as if they were still coming out from a total anaesthetic.  Shaun Woodward, the Northern Ireland secretary, produced what was clearly meant to be a big applause line: "You need to count on your leader, and your leader should know he can count on you!" This was met by a smattering of enthusiasm. If the applause had been icing sugar, it wouldn't have covered the cake. Jack Straw, the putative Pierrepoint of the operation, had the opportunity to back the boss. He didn't take it. Instead he mentioned vaguely that Gordon Brown's approach had guided the country "in more placid times" - damning with faint ignorals. Jacqui Smith got the best reaction, which is saying very little. Emily Benn, 18-year-old granddaughter of Tony Benn, announced that it was a "fantastic honour to be anywhere near her!" How unlike her grandfather, who used to knife cabinet colleagues, in front and back. She was rewarded with a home secretarial hug. At the end of Ms Smith's speech a few people stood to applaud, then more, but very, very slowly. It was like a standing ovation from scores of arthritis sufferers.