Back in 1975 General Franco took an unconscionable time to die. It seemed to take months. When he finally went the great cartoonist Bryan McAllister had a drawing on the front page of this paper showing the struggling pallbearers. One says anxiously to the other, "Did you hear a cough?" I fear that the passing of Gordon Brown will be a little like that. No doubt he will survive next week's conference - expect a prolonged standing ovation for his speech - but it would be nice if, after a dozen or so years, they decided to turn down the triumphalism just a bit. In the past the leader has strode on to the stage like an emperor just back from the destruction of some rebellious tribe, its leaders - Major, Hague, Duncan Smith, Howard etc - publicly crucified along the road to Rome. Or else like a soap star launching a new mid-range family hatchback at some ghastly conference centre. Pounding music accompanies a video celebrating the party's multitudinous achievements: devolution, minimum wage, tax credits, woolly hats for pensioners (Iraq is never mentioned).  In an ideal world they would go the whole way. The old theme tune would be replaced by Things Have Really Gone Pear-Shaped. The conference slogan would be "Surveying the wreckage". Brown would shuffle to the lectern, and instead of performing a fashionable note-free speech would peer myopically at a sheaf of blotchy papers. We'd have a close-up of his hands (a colleague who found himself six inches from one prime ministerial hand the other day reports that the nails were chewed down to the quick, wherever that is) and he would begin the speech with long, wracking sobs. But he won't.  Back in Bournemouth, the Lib Dem conference had been cleared away and preparations made for next month's appearance by Sally Morgan, described as the "Psychic to the Stars". Those who suspect the dead do not communicate with the living, and that if they did they would be unlikely to choose as their conduit a woman who wears hideous diamante-studded spectacle frames, may scoff. And we do.  For example, her leaflet has a quote from Princess Diana: "Thank you - forever grateful." Grateful for what? For her warning, "Don't get into a Mercedes in Paris with that Egyptian millionaire's son"? Why do these psychics never ever tell you anything that might be remotely useful?  Mind you, I suspect none of us can ever be entirely rational. I am still superstitious. I recently mentioned losing all my keys. After a day I promised St Anthony a &pound;100 gift to charity if they turned up. Then 24 hours later I doubled the offer - still much less than the cost of replacing the keys would have been, not to mention the peace of mind. The next morning the train company phoned to say they had them.  The money you offer can be proportionate, say 50p for a pair of mislaid scissors, &pound;75 for a passport you can't find the morning you're going on holiday. But you always have to pay St Anthony, or you'd never get his help again. So I sent off the money, with a demented, irrational, stupid belief that it was a wise investment. I felt a complete idiot. On the other hand, the charities were probably pleased.  Don Quixote is one of those books I'd always meant to read, so a holiday in southern Spain seemed a good time to do so. The countryside, well north of the Costa del Sol, where the Brits all seem to have tattoos and beer bellies - including the children - is still much as Cervantes described. We were staying in a remote valley, and I could be reading about the hero's encounter with goatherds as a herd of goats crossed the hill, bells clanking, a hundred yards away. But we were also near the track of the AVE, Spain's equivalent of the TGV, which occasionally raced across vast, gleaming viaducts. This being the new Europe, there are monstrous wind turbines on many of the otherwise unspoiled mountain tops. Don Quixote would have got very excited by those and charged at them before Sancho Panza could stop him. But of course, unlike the windmills in the book, they are ugly, overpriced and unproductive. The falling value of the pound is taking some of the charm away from European holidays. The exchange rate with the euro was less than five to four while we were there. People will come back and say, "we found this charming little venta - you know, a basic roadside caf&eacute; - and we had iced garlic soup, wonderful prawns in pil pil sauce, the most delicious fresh fried cod, all washed down with a bottle of cold Albari&ntilde;o, and the whole lot cost not much more than it would in the West End of London..."  One consequence may be that people will start emigrating here. Another book I read was Driving Over Lemons by Chris Stewart, the chap who bought a ramshackle farmhouse in Andalucia and wrote three pleasing books about living there. Maybe well-to-do goatherds will turn up in Britain and write their own experiences, especially after our property crash. "Soon, for the cost of barely a quarter million euros, we found ourselves the proud owners of a charming old house in the west London suburbs. A laughing, kindly electrician, Wayne, came round and told us that he could rewire the whole place for just &pound;4,000. That would scarcely cover the call-out charge in Antequera!  "Tesco's mini-mart was a riot of colour. Gorgeous mange tout from Zimbabwe, glossy red peppers from Holland, golden yellow baby corncobs from Kenya - we could shop the world half a mile from our new house. And tears came to my wife's eyes when she was presented with a club card. In the club at last! We felt we had been truly accepted by the simple but delightful people of our new neighbourhood ...