The last day of the summer session and the Speaker said he was setting up a committee to consider parliamentary representation for women and ethnic minorities. It was the prime minister's idea. He wants the Commons to look more like the population at large. It is a worthy idea, but the problem isn't just that some demographic groups are under-represented. Many are greatly over-represented, including men and white people, but also lawyers, professional politicians and Scots. Whereas loads of Scots sit for English seats, there is only one non-Scot, Mark Lazarowicz, holding a Scottish seat. What makes me think the committee won't look at that? Just my cynicism, I suppose. Gordon Brown took the opportunity to talk about Iraq. Things were going well until David Cameron pointed out that last October - before the prime minister cancelled the election he claims not to have planned - he had flown to Basra in order to upstage the Conservative conference. There he had announced a drawdown of 1,000 British troops.  But the Tory leader claimed that the troop numbers had not been reduced; depending on how you counted them, they had actually crept up. On the other hand, there was no election imminent any more. Several Conservatives affected to be enraged at this. "It makes my blood boil," said Mark Lancaster, a member of the TA. He demanded an apology. So the prime minister accused the Tories of playing party politics with our armed forces. This magnificent example of chutzpah - like having Gordon Ramsay tell you off for swearing - flabbergasted the Tories who, admittedly, seemed greatly to enjoy gasting their flabber. Next Ed Balls, the schools secretary, arrived to talk about the monumental schools secretary-up about this year's SAT tests. Mr Balls's response was crafty. Since the government was responsible for the test results, it would have been quite wrong for them to have had anything to do with the marking of the tests. "Arms length," he kept saying. It's the cry of the desperate minister down the ages: "I am responsible, but I am not to blame." The Tories, and the squeaky but effective Michael Gove, treated this argument with utter contempt. The marking had been done by "teenagers and cocktail waitresses", he said. This seemed a little unfair to cocktail waitresses, but I saw his point - if you went to a trendy bar, would you want your cocktail shaken by a retired teacher in a tweed jacket with leather patches? The minister, said Mr Gove, was like an exam candidate who hadn't done his revision - crossing fingers, hoping for the best and hoping not to get any difficult questions. Mr Balls accused him of "rhetoric and grandstanding, not in the public interest", which is what ministers reply when they haven't got a reply. Then they had the adjournment debate in which MPs traditionally talk about their constituencies. Angela Browning trilled about Devon and its wonderful food. "Even vegetarians like ruby-red Devon beef!" she said. It was that sort of debate.