Nick Clegg launched an exciting new Lib Dem policy document yesterday. You could tell it was exciting because it's printed on shiny paper with lots of pictures. The booklet is titled Make it Happen. This is part of the Obamafication of British politics, by which parties adopt bold, thrilling slogans that mean almost nothing at all. In Obama's case these include "Yes we can!" and "Fired up! Ready to go!" I occasionally point out that if the direct opposite of something is clearly ludicrous, there is little point saying it in the first place. "Oh, let it drop" would be a terrible name for an exciting policy paper. So would a chant of "We probably can't!" or, "Pissed off! Packing it in!" In Labour party leaflets people are smiling happily - in bright new schools, safe green parks, or on clean trains with friendly, smiling guards. In Tory pamphlets they look miserable, or else joyful at the prospect of a Conservative government. Since there isn't going to be a Lib Dem government in the near future, all their people need to look pained and puzzled. Mr Clegg himself looks baffled but caring. (It was perhaps a mistake to put his picture opposite a big caption: "Why does the government ignore me?") Another mistake was to have the launch in an echoey Westminster restaurant where they were preparing for the day's work. There was a single podium at the back of the room.  "Are they trying to start a cult of personality?" a colleague asked me. I thought they must be, as Vince Cable (polls show he is much the most popular Lib Dem MP) was not present, even though the heart of the document is tax policy, Vince's special subject. Clearly the Supreme Leader wanted the spotlights to play only on him. On the other hand, it didn't work. Mr Clegg may suffer from the opposite of charisma, which is "amsirahc". His voice was reflected from the plate-glass all around him. A dishwasher sometimes churned in the kitchen. His words tend to tail off anyway, so what with all this and the sound of crashing cutlery, it was often difficult to follow what he said. Much of what we could make out didn't sound bad. He wants to cut taxes for the poor. He wants to reform party funding. He thinks that the Tory cuts in inheritance tax "will only benefit dead millionaires". But he also plans to deliver many magnificently vague and intangible promises, all of which were the direct opposite of utter nonsense.  "We want to make Britain fairer!" (We want to make Britain more unjust.) "We need a tax system that offers transparency, clarity and a level playing field!" (We need a fiscal system that is obfuscatory, incomprehensible and biased towards the rich.) "You've got to be clear about taking the tough choices!" (We are hunting for easy, short-term options.) "The Liberal Democrats will put people first!" (We will value people less than the big corporations.) Bang-ghurr! Thrumm! Clang! The kitchen was almost ready for service. The Lib Dem claque clapped and he posed for the final pictures.