It was a nervous, tense House of Commons yesterday. As so often when there is a movement of the political tectonic plates, people were whispering anxiously, desperate to hear the latest news, terrified about what it might be. But nobody knew for certain whether Lembit Opik had actually broken up with his Cheeky Girl. We knew that the lovely Gabriela had gone to ground, and had not spoken to the Lib Dem MP for two weeks. Her mother was evasive. "Gabriela just wants a little bit of space," she said. "She is having a breather in the relationship." On the one hand, it was officially announced that she was still wearing her engagement ring. On the other - and this was the most worrying sign - it was reported that Mr Opik was not taking calls from journalists. This is like news that the Pope had stopped praying, or that Amy Winehouse had given up hitting people. Things looked grim. A break-up would be disastrous for Mr Opik's career. He has already lost one fiancee, celebrity weather girl Sian Lloyd. If he loses another, will he ever again be able to command two dozen pages in Hello! and OK! magazines?  Gordon Brown was too discreet to raise the topic at his monthly press conference yesterday, though presumably it was weighing heavily on his mind, since he repeated himself endlessly, going through the motions, unable to wrench his mind from the most pressing concern. The topic for the day was knife crime, and plans to control it. The measures would be "tough, visible and effective". People convicted of carrying knives would face "tough payback orders", which might mean 300 hours' community service - scraping off graffiti, or cleaning the streets on Friday and Saturday nights. The government's strategy, he told us, was "enforcement, punishment and prevention".  It soon became clear that this was his complete answer to the problem. Someone asked if he had looked into the social causes of knife crime. "We are bringing together measures to enforce, punish and prevent," he revealed.  There would be "parenting contracts" for the 110,000 families whose children were most involved in crime. This would be allied to "tough enforcement, punishment, and prevention". Someone else inquired whether the notion of having knifers come face to face with their victims in hospital was such a lousy idea that it showed the government didn't have a proper strategy. But they had! "More enforcement, more punishment, and prevention too," he said. Then he produced a cunning plan. He would change the order of the three ingredients. That would wake us up! "It is a combination of punishment, prevention and enforcement. It is the three things together!"  We were beginning to catch the drift. Was this not a sign, he was asked, that society was broken? No. "The stark fact is that crime is down. "We need to toughen up enforcement, toughen up punishment, toughen up prevention." Finally we got on to Zimbabwe and Iran. But that didn't last. "You've got to have punishment, yes, you've got to have prevention, you've got to have enforcement!" The Iranian government's behaviour was "unacceptable" and so was President Mugabe's. Would they be forced to scrub graffiti? Could we expect to see President Mugabe painting an old folks' home? Finally, having given us his formula for ending street crime, he turned round and marched away - no doubt in hope that there was news - any news - about Mr Opik and the adorable Ms Irimia.