The House of Lords set about the counter-terrorism bill (and its 42-days detention without charge provision) rather like that fellow who smashed three priceless Chinese vases at the Fitzwilliam museum. Except that the noble lordships were doing it on purpose - the visitor tripped over his shoelaces. And the vases are now restored and back on display. The bill is unlikely to be so lucky. Might as well get out the dustpan now. Gosh, they hate it. I felt sorry for Admiral Lord West, the soi-disant "simple sailor", who had to sketch out the government's case, such as it is. I hope he never had to address the men from the quarter-deck in the same terms. "Er, um, on the whole, we do feel it might, as a matter of principle, be a good idea to engage the enemy, though I do realise some of you chaps may disagree ..."  Anyhow, he did his duty and when Gordon Brown - who seems obsessed about getting this law through against all conceivable odds - reads the speech he will no doubt grunt with quiet pleasure. Especially at the bit about it being "one of the arrows in our quiver of measures to remove the cancer of terrorism". Block that metaphor! as they say at the New Yorker.  After that their lordships started to empty their own quivers at the bill. Spooks and lawyers were in the lead. Lady Neville-Jones, who chaired the Joint Intelligence Committee, spoke for the Tories. "Terrorists want to provoke the state into these measures - we are doing their job for them." She added: "Citizens must repose their trust in each other, not in the state for fear of each other!" I have no idea what that meant, but it sounded terrific. Lord Thomas of Gresford, a Liberal Democrat lawyer, made a curious speech, much of it about Welsh terrorism. Once he had turned in a Welsh colleague who, it turned out, spent his weekends blowing up pipelines. "Information comes from within the community," he told us. So if we can infiltrate a few more Lib Dem barristers into the mosques of Bradford, we're safe! Labour grandees were among the loudest opponents. Lord Falconer, Tony Blair's lord chancellor, was against it: "We need no artificial deadlines." Then the maiden speech by Lady Manningham-Buller, until recently director-general of MI5. She had balanced the right to life with the greatest of all civil liberties, and couldn't support 42 days. Lord Mackay, a former Tory lord chancellor, Lord Lester, a prominent Lib Dem ("result of squalid tactics in the Commons ... illusory, cumbersome and self-defeating"), even Lord Goldsmith, a Labour attorney-general: "You risk giving away the very freedoms and liberties terrorists are trying to take from us." All totally agin it. Gordo must be feeling very grim.