For two weeks and two weeks only we bang on in this country about not having enough good tennis players, young British hopefuls losing in the first round, how does Serbia produce more seeds in one year than we do in the average century, and much hand-wringing. Then Wimbledon ends, and we forget all about it. Few of us watch any of the other grand slam tournaments, and Andy Murray's plucky second round defeat in the Exxa Insurance Small Middle East Oligarchy Classic gets a single line on the Today programme. We don't care that much about tennis, not in the way that people care all year about football, cricket and rugby. You might as well moan that we have too few p&eacute;tanque champions, or that our lacrosse team has been humiliated again. It's also the fault of the men in blazers, the people who run tennis, and who don't appear to care either, so long as their Wimbledon tickets arrive. Administrators are, at the top level, the bane of sport. For instance a statue of Gordon Banks, perhaps the greatest goalie ever to play football, is soon to be unveiled at Stoke's ground. The prime minister welcomed the news in parliament. When I was a boy and lived in Leicester my brother and I watched Banks play every fortnight and we knew he was, by miles, the best goalie in the land. But it was an interminable time before the guys in the blazers picked him - Leicester was too far away and the club too unfashionable (though not as deeply unfashionable as it is now). Thanks to these clowns England were deprived of his astounding skills for several years. But that never bothered the blazers. Their positions and their cup final tickets were safe.  Last week's Jewish joke has brought in others; thanks. I particularly like this. A butcher's shop in Moscow in the old days. It's winter and a gale whips around the queue. After an hour the butcher comes out and announces: "There is less meat today. All Jews should go home." An hour later it's snowing. The butcher declares: "There is even less meat than I thought. All non-party members should leave." Finally, much later, with a blizzard now howling down the street, he emerges to say: "I have no meat at all. Everybody can clear off."  As they leave one old woman grumbles: "Typical - the Jews always get the best deal."   It causes me some pain, but I have to admit that our local railway franchise, South West Trains, is actually doing quite well. You can't assume services will run on time, but a lot more do than before. The rolling stock is, mostly, smooth and clean. The information service is pretty good too, so at least if your train is half an hour late you can make other plans. I suspect one reason is that SWT has held the franchise for more than 12 years, and so has had time to bed down. Unlike the service from London to Norwich, where I often go to visit my parents. The first privatised trains were OK. Then the regulators gave the line to a company called One, which was stupid, since you got announcements like "welcome aboard the One 1.30 to Liverpool Street". They were worse and seemed incapable of cleaning train exteriors so that even bright summer days looked like Dor&eacute; engravings of East End slums. Now they've given it to National Express, who so far are dismal. Last Saturday I got the 12.30 to London. About 10 miles out we stopped in the middle of a field. Passengers came marching down the aisles shouting "the train is on fire!".  But it wasn't a fire, just the smell from brakes that had collapsed. Ninety minutes later we were towed back into Norwich. I got the renamed 2.30 south. Just outside Ipswich we stopped in another field. Turned out we were stuck behind another broken-down train. I got home nearly four hours late. To lose one train is a misfortune; to lose two is probably a sign of money being saved on maintenance. The privatisation process was full of this built-in stupidity, and the frequent arbitrary crap shoot for the franchises doesn't seem to help.   Sunday was better, as I had a trip round Strawberry Hill, the astonishing Gothic castle built in south-west London 250 years ago by Horace Walpole, who wrote The Castle of Otranto, and whose father was Robert Walpole, our first prime minister. The Walpoles were the first family to live in Downing Street. In 1735 the young Horace helped serve Queen Caroline, who had visited for breakfast, which in those days included wine. Strawberry Hill is about to be closed for a refurbishment costing more than &pound;8m. The house already looks as if the builders are in, with piles of rubble in the rooms, paint-stained radios and jars of instant coffee amid the incipient splendour. It looks forlorn, but also exciting as you get glimpses of the glory to return. In the past nobody stripped wallpaper, but simply stuck the new lot on top of the old, so in some rooms you can see fragments of seven or eight designs all gummed together. Walpole's taste made the average Indian restaurant look understated. The restored house is due to open in spring 2010.  Can you guess who the most popular politician in the country is? Of course most of them are deeply unpopular, which is why when a polling group, Politics Home, asks its regular panel of 5,000 people to say whether they have a positive or negative impression of 21 pols, only three get a plus rating. David Cameron is on zero, which means that exactly the same number like him as dislike him. The most popular of all is TV's William Hague (+12) with Vincent Cable (+10) a surprisingly close runner-up. The next highest shadow cabinet member is Michael Gove (-5), which is also surprising. The best-liked Labour person is James Purnell, and he scores only -9. The good news for Gordon Brown is that on -45 he is not at the bottom. The bad news is that the least popular politician is his chancellor, Alistair Darling, who scores a terrible -48.