 It's interesting that the moment the government warned people not to start panic buying fuel everyone started panic buying. Partly it's common sense. If you hear the authorities say "we won't have to impose a hosepipe ban provided people don't all water their lawns", naturally you get watering while you still can. Everyone else is. But it's also because of all that spin, the underlying assumption that the electorate exists only to be manipulated. Because governments have lost the habit of telling us the truth, over the years we've come routinely to believe the opposite of what they say. Gordon Brown tells us that we are well placed to weather the recession, so we assume that we're worse off than other countries. Ministers say that crime figures are down, so we rush out to buy car alarms and window bolts. People talk knowingly about the loss of deference to authority, but the scandal is that authority no longer defers to us, no longer assumes that telling us the truth is any more than one of a number of options, usually the least appealing.  David Davis has never really played the political game. (Wouldn't it be strange if, say, just 17 people voted in his byelection? Haltemprice would mark a return to rotten boroughs.) He always gave the impression of being slightly detached from his colleagues. He had a line in witty, astringent put-downs, most of which got back to the victims. Of a pompous Tory who wore chalk-stripe suits: "I think you'll find the stripe goes all the way through." I once introduced Boris Johnson's father Stanley to Davis, while he was chairman of the Conservative party. Stanley was very eager to get back into the European parliament then, and he asked the chairman how to set about it.  "You should write to me at Central Office," Davis said, "provided you don't mind getting my form reply." "Ah, what does that say?" asked Stanley. "It says 'no'," Davis told him.  His great friend was another acid-tongued onlooker, the late Alan Clark, whose rebarbative wit upset plenty of people too. I hope he will use his time on the backbenches to write his own memoirs, which could be almost as amusing and as revealing.  Recently The Oldie magazine ran a sarcastic cartoon labelled, I think, 'Life before fluorescent jackets'. It showed a road littered with the corpses of postmen, lollipop ladies, road repairers, etc. This week I saw a gaggle of very young children near us being shepherded to school. They each wore a bright yellow fluorescent vest, with the name of a local estate agent printed prominently on the back. It was a brilliantly sunny day, and any driver who could not have seen them clearly from a quarter mile away would have had his license removed. So these little kids encapsulated two aspects of life in modern Britain: the obsession with redundant safety measures which make nobody safer, and the need to plaster every available surface - train tickets, cricket shirts, taxi cabs - with advertising.  I give in. Contrary to what I wrote last week, there are lots of songs about American streets, and even one or two about British towns and cities. Nigel Draper points out that Aimee Duffy had a hit with Rockferry [sic] about her father's birthplace, normally written as Rock Ferry. "Once a fashionable Victorian resort, it's now one of the poorest parts of Merseyside," he writes. So not quite as romantic as San Francisco, and the song is about a state of misery no flowers in the hair could alleviate. Several New York streets, including 42nd and 59th get a mention, to say nothing of Beale Street in Memphis and Basin Street in New Orleans. Several readers offered what may be the longest thoroughfare in song, Route 66. Last week I mentioned Bond Street, London, and suggested there was no song about that. I was wrong: David Bowie did one. But Alasdair Buchan emails to say that he read the column during a coffee break while sorting out some old jazz CDs. "I went back to work and the first CD I picked up was called Jazz Greats - Yanks In Britain. And there it was: Bond Street, by Fats Waller. Coincidences don't come much spookier than that."  The other day in Hexham, Northumberland, I ran into Mike Parker, who runs an admirable organisation called Gaps For Grumpies, offering the gap year experience to people over the age of 40. Instead of going on package tours or towing caravans, they can head off to Peru, Ghana or east Africa and do good works, while sharing the lives of local people. This week Mike wrote to say that they had just signed up their oldest volunteer, Keith Doherty, of Harpenden, Hertfordshire, who is 71. He's going to Ghana to help build a schoolroom. It's a nice idea: vast groups of docile 19-year-olds being shepherded round in tour buses, while the elderly get on with building artesian wells, teaching orphans English, and strumming guitars while getting pissed on fermented jackfruit juice. Gapsforgrumpies.com.  It is the 125th anniversary of the Cambridge Footlights, so we went up to see the new touring show, mainly because our daughter is in it. That makes for a pretty nerve-racking experience. I was reminded of when she was very young; I would walk her to her primary school, and as she ran across the playground to meet her friends, reflect that having children is like setting a paper boat out across a lake: you created it, you can watch it, but in the end fate and chance will play a much bigger part than you ever can. Would people jeer?  Or would she - and the others in the company - be received in polite silence, with half the audience leaving at the interval? Anyhow, nobody arrived with eggs and rotten fruit, and the show was very funny indeed. You know you've cracked it when lines that are not in themselves remotely funny are greeted with shouts of laughter.