There comes a time in a government's life when you can almost see the power and authority drain away. For nearly 11 years, Labour rebellions were limited because there was a price to pay for defying the leaders. Now there is presumed to be a reward, which is why Gordon Brown had to give way over 10p this week.  Labour MPs sense that there is scant hope of their party holding on at the next election, so they do what they can to cling onto their own seats, protesting loudly against, say, the closing of local post offices. It won't do them much good; they can tell their constituents as often as they like how tenaciously they fought against government plans, but the voters, always ungrateful, will likely throw them out anyway. Another sign of portending doom is what happens on the leader's foreign trips. These are designed to show him as a world statesman, discussing planetary problems with other global statespersons. There is always a set piece press conference at which the premier wants to talk about world trade, or the environment. Instead he is pursued by questions about parochial matters.  In the US Brown had to talk about "ten pee" which George Bush claimed to think was a small town in the west, possibly confusing British tax provisions with Tempe, Arizona. Margaret Thatcher used to go abroad to get a break from piffling local concerns - it was her visit to Paris during the crucial vote in 1990 that probably lost her the premiership. John Major suffered the same. When it happened to Gordon Brown this month it was the same as if the raven had made its home in his study.  Mind you, he still doesn't look as bad as Tony Blair does in Phil Hale's portrait, unveiled this week. Even the hands look careworn. The hair is slightly mussed, and the open neck shirt, instead of appearing casual and relaxed, makes it seem that he simply couldn't be bothered to put on a tie. There is a triangle of shirt showing just above the trousers, as if he's lost weight so his jacket doesn't hang properly and the pants are loose. John Major had the same trouble near the end of his term of office: a famous portrait showed him with a terrible wrinkled crotch, as if someone had forced a washboard down his trousers. As for Blair's face, it is an almost morbid picture of misery. It's a cliche to compare these things with the picture of Dorian Grey, but it's justified here. Except that the Blair in the attic is not the evil liar his enemies believed, but sad, embittered, and dreadfully tired.  I saw Jeffrey Archer at the annual Hatchards' authors' party a few days ago. He was there in the same room as - if not necessarily hobnobbing with - Michael Frayn, Claire Tomalin, Michael Palin, Melvyn Bragg, Julian Barnes, Posy Simmonds, Mavis Cheek and many others. It must take a certain brass nerve to turn up at such an event, and if two people accidentally dropped glasses of champagne more or less at his feet, I am sure that was not his fault. Meanwhile his new novel is comfortably inside the top-10 best sellers. Lord Archer is not exactly a national treasure - what is the opposite of that concept? - but by golly you have to admire his limitless resilience.  Last weekend was nostalgic; I went to speak at the Scarborough Literary Festival. When I was a boy we always had a day trip there during the summer holiday, which was spent in nearby Filey. Scarborough, by comparison, was big, sophisticated and exciting. It was out of season so the festival people were able to put us up, at doubtless greatly reduced rates, in the Royal Hotel, where I had a huge suite, all on my own.  I learned to my astonishment that our annual treat - the re-enactment of the Battle of the River Plate, on the lake at Peaseholme Park, still continues after 60 or so years. It's like hearing that a Victorian magic lantern show is still playing. Scarborough has a certain magnetic appeal, which is no doubt why a very small festival was able to attract, among others, Ian Rankin, Joanne Harris and Louis de Berni&egrave;res.  The late EW Swanton, cricket writer, once pointed to "Nasser Hussain" on a team sheet and remarked with trembling voice, "I never thought I would see such a name in the England team!" What he would have made of the 20/20 cricket now going on in India I cannot begin to imagine. They even have cheerleaders. I caught the end of a match between two artificial teams, the Rajasthan Royals (in electric blue pyjamas) and the Deccan Chargers (beige). Shane Warne hit two sixes and a four in the last over to win the match for the Royals, and very exciting it was. Except that it made me want to recreate my own past: sitting in an almost empty Grace Road, Leicester, watching a few overs between showers, reading a book, finally opening the greaseproof paper to eat my two meat paste sandwiches, washed down with orange squash.