Outside in the real world stock markets were collapsing. Jobs are going to disappear, mortgage rates are flying upwards, and house prices might well collapse. But not here. Gordon Brown was reporting to the Commons on the European Council meeting. He decided to get the bad news out of the way by producing a stream of gabbled, even gobbled, jargon.  "Prompt and full exposures to structured products ... off-balance sheet activities ... improvements in valuation standards for illiquid assets ... capital adequacy rules," and so on. No MP can admit he doesn't understand this stuff. For all I know, Mr Brown was making it up as he went along. So anxious was he to get it out of the way that he adopted the strategy used by the late Robin Cook: swallowing whole syllables at once, like a child bolting broccoli without chewing.  "Fun-shun" meant functioning; institutions became "instuns" and individuals were "indulls". There were more of his weird pronunciations: "VAT reets", "trans-pear-ancy", and a stricken country known as Tea-bet. At one point he delighted the Tories (and a few Labour people, I suspect, if secretly) by referring to another land called Czechoslovakia, which has not existed since the end of the Soviet bloc. Robert Goodwill, a Tory smart alec, leapt. "Following the PM's reference to Czechoslovakia - obviously a faraway place of which he knows little - do we know if he gets his foreign affairs briefings from the president of the United States?" There are plenty of crisp put-downs available for that but Mr Brown didn't come up with any, and merely grunted that he talked regularly to his colleagues in Europe. Just as in 1938 Neville Chamberlain thought that Czechoslovakia was unworthy of our attention, so the prime minister implied that it was "horrible, fantastic and incredible" that we were digging economic trenches and wearing financial gas masks because of a faraway crisis of which we knew little. Why, "our economy is resilient and the fundamentals are strong". However, we would remain vigilant, and would "take whatever action is necessary to maintain economic stability". The prime minister resembles a lone oarsman caught in a north Atlantic tempest; as the boat pitches and the waves crash, one wonders just what action he can possibly take. The Tories tried to get him to say whether he was going to reappoint Peter Mandelson as trade commissioner in Brussels.  David Cameron mused that Mr Mandelson had often given him helpful briefings "on trade - and, I have to say, on other issues too".  The implication was that the other issues included the inadequacies of Gordon Brown.  As the Tories roared, I was reminded of the Thurber cartoon in which a fencer neatly slices off his opponent's head, with a cry of "Touche!" The joke is that the other fellow simply doesn't realise what has happened.