It must be awful being a Labour defence minister at question time. You sit there facing the might of the Dreadnought class of Tory MPs, massive men of war, their self-esteem armour clad, every one of whom lives in a permanent state of outrage at the state of our armed forces. Their rage comes in like rocket fire. During the first world war, they said you could sometimes hear the guns from Dover. You can probably hear some Tory MPs from Mons. There was Sir Peter Tapsell, flagship of the fleet, red of face and huge of waistcoat. He said nothing throughout the whole session, but radiated disapproval like the roaring log fire in the drawing room of a damp Scottish castle. Or take the Hon Nicholas Soames. At one point someone raised the problems of HMS Illustrious, an aircraft carrier that has twice recently had to be towed into port after it broke down. I like to imagine them sending tugs for Soames to tow him back into the Commons after a particularly good lunch, to the accompaniment of foghorns and cheering crowds. Richard Beynon was enraged by the Ministry of Defence's contract with a company called the Priory Group, which treats service persons for trauma stress. "We heard of one case of a soldier who sat next to a woman who was receiving bereavement counselling - for the loss of her cat!" On they went, attacking the ministers for dithering, for being unprepared, for letting costs run away.  Soames asked the government to confirm that "the costs of the joint strike fighter are now ballooning out of control and the number ordered by the Ministry of Defence will be quite impossible to achieve!" And indeed there is something distinctly non-Palmerstonian in much of what they say. Bob Ainsworth, a junior minister, was asked about the possibility that we may have to send a battalion to Kosovo.  His reply could hardly be described as sabre-rattling: "Let us hope that everybody plays a constructive role and that peace prevails."  GW Hunt's 1878 song would have to be rewritten to meet modern sensibilties: "We don't want to fight, but by jingo if we do, we can only hope that everybody plays a constructive role and that peace prevails." However, it soon became clear that apart from the treacherous Serb, the perfidious Iraqi and the wily Afghan, the most hated enemy in Westminster yesterday was Matt Drudge, whose Drudge Report website revealed that Prince Harry was in Afghanistan. James Arbuthnot was the first MP to get his tonsils round the now revered name of Prince Harry.  "Whatever Prince Harry may modestly say about himself, they are indeed heroes, and we can be utterly proud of what they are doing.  "Has the secretary of state been on Facebook and has he been invited to join a group demanding an apology from the Drudge Report?" There were loud cries of "hear hear" and even "I've joined already!" Des Browne joined in the praise for the heroes, but added diffidently: "It may not be wise for me to join Facebook." And I suspect he is right.