Endgame 1945<br /> by David Stafford <br /> Little, Brown £20, pp448 This is the way the war ends: not with euphoria, but in chaos, confusion and continuing cruelty. They think it's all over? They're wrong. And here David Stafford, who specialises in essentially human history - great events seen through individual eyes - weaves an often majestic tapestry of testimony from the anguish of those who survived Belsen, those who liberated Berlin and those whose ordeal we hear far less of, because Delfzijl and the Cap Arcona never got the headlines they deserved. It's an inevitably uneven book; that is the nature of the human experience upon which it relies. One witness, the 26-year-old German daughter of a plotter who failed to kill Hitler, is whisked from her aristocratic life as mistress of an Italian villa into Buchenwald. Her husband is gone, her two little children are lost. It will be a remarkable year of suffering before they are united again. The story of Fey von Hassell is poignant enough for Hollywood. Another witness, a determined, valiant Brit, Francesca Wilson, is there among the debris with UN Relief and Rehabilitation, but little she sees adds insight to devastation. Geoffrey Cox and his New Zealanders march vividly through Italy; Robert Reid from BBC Manchester gets some gut-wrenching stories, but watches Frank Gillard scoop him for others. Time and again, you sit up and take notice in ways that more conventional history lets slip. Nazis brutal, Allies gentle? It wasn't quite that simple. As they liberated the concentration camps, even hard hats such as George Patton turning aside from the piles of bodies to be physically sick, America's troops grew revolted by the bestiality they saw. Could you trust a German to surrender? No way, after too much duplicity. SS and paratroopers had to be dispatched 'on sight' - and were. No Geneva Convention niceties here. 'We were bringing in casualties and my captain said, "Take them out and shoot 'em." And they did. It was awful. He murdered them.' The killing only abated when HQ found enemy intelligence drying up. Gabby prisoners needed to talk. The quality of mercy came cynically constrained. But should we wonder at this or many more horrors beside? Not in the sense that this is real war, waged by real people. Live through a night of carnage with young Reg Roy as his Canadian Cape Bretoners take terrible casualties in the flat fields around Delfzijl, the last Dutch port in German hands. Live through a day of hapless carnage as RAF Typhoon bombers sink ships - the Thielbek and converted liner Cap Arcona - full of prisoners of war (French, Belgian, Dutch, Poles, Russians) being shipped out of Hamburg: 2,750 die on the Thielbek; 4,250 are burned or drowned as the huge Cap Arcona goes down. RAF headquarters knew there were prisoners on those ships, but 'by some oversight, the message was never passed on'. Friendly fire has never seemed more malevolent. As these incidents, and many more like them, form a pattern, you begin to find resonances with echoes for today, not 60 years ago. Take Iraq. When the German armies in Holland surrendered, they were not immediately disarmed or incarcerated. Instead, by local agreement, they were left intact to keep order on the streets, dealing with Dutch rioters and looters celebrating Nazi defeat. Any compliant force for law and order was better than none, we reckoned. Tell that to Dick Cheney and Paul Bremer. Why, Churchill even wanted to keep the Wehrmacht together on a broader front for exactly that practical purpose (though Eisenhower took no heed). The lesson Baghdad forgot was written in mud, not sand. Could you just walk out and leave populations to their fate? That's what we did in the Sudetenland, three million ethnic Germans expelled, to add to the 12 million suddenly driven from their former homelands by Poland and Stalin in the biggest ethnic cleansing 20th-century Europe endured. Pack up and quit - and tragedy lingered behind. The legacy of hate was more hate. The collaborators, in France, Holland or Italy, were seized on by mobs and often torn limb from limb. Peace meant retribution as well as rejoicing. The endgame was often as brutal a game as war itself. And grisly logic, in the rubble, was German girls selling themselves for a few cigarettes and a bar of chocolate. The last breadwinners left. The success of Stafford's method, using ordinary men with ordinary voices (and wives, such as Vera Reid back in Stockport with the kids), is to make such testimony still moving and urgent six decades on. The concentration camps ought to be as unforgettable now as they were to the troops who first found them. The stench of 'rotting flesh, faeces and urine' that hung over Belsen should never entirely fade. Nor should the woman who greeted one Red Cross worker: 'Me ... no name - only number - no country, just a Jewess, do you understand? I am only a dog.' The evil that men do lives on and on. Once you see that through human eyes as the dark side of continuing humanity, easy pieties and slogans fade away. You know what war was like, is like and will be like again. You see the mistakes and evasions. You look into the depths and shudder. Endgame 1945 isn't a footnote to history. It's the last chapter in a book from which to learn before another volume opens.