Bill Clinton: Mastering the Presidency  by Nigel Hamilton  Century £25, pp766 In episode two of Nigel Hamilton's scintillating biography, our hero has left behind the hick town of Hope, Arkansas - and his humble roots - and travelled, with his lady, to Pennsylvania Avenue. It has not been a journey without incident (or other ladies strewn in various states of undress across his path). But Mrs C, as ever, has stood by her man - which is when she enjoys most traction over this slovenly, sheepish political genius. So here we are in the White House, sorting out office space. That's the Vice-President's room over there. Oh no it's not! says Hillary angrily. That's the office you said was mine, 'you motherfucker'. Whereupon, before stunned witnesses, the 42nd President of the United States calls his wife a 'fucking bitch'. Yes: we have transition ... The shambles begins. Hamilton's speciality, with a few nods to psychoanalysis, lies not just in telling us what happened but why and how it happened. As he follows William Jefferson Clinton from straitened beginnings to glorious success, he tries to burrow inside the man, to think as he thought, to see through his eyes the decisions that had to be made. But, frankly, the first hundred rotten days were, and remain, an almost inexplicable mess. Clinton has huge charm, great gifts and high intelligence. But back in the governor's mansion in Little Rock, Betsey Wright organised everything for him, picking the people he needed, firing the ones he didn't. There is no Betsey waiting in Washington DC. Worse, Hillary, who fancies herself as a kind of co-President, has dumped the natural head of the transition team, so nobody's in charge. Warren Christopher floats around as a kind of diplomatic Jeeves, not taking decisions. Mike McLarty, the old chum from Arkansas made chief of staff, is too weak to get much done. (They call him the 'nice man', not the knife man.) The President is wasting days interviewing minor cabinet ministers. Hillary has taken over some of that job, and picked the disaster called Zoe Baird. Meanwhile, has anyone thought who can handle the campaign centrepiece of health-care reform? Names come and go: and then comes Hillary, the team leader the real team leader can't sack. Clinton stumbles into the gays in the military crisis and stumbles out again. Cancel my last announcement. Actually, cancel any prospect of a transition to harness the strengths of election victory. As Paula Jones and other sex ghosts from the past begin to prowl around, things could hardly get worse. That's the scene Hamilton sets with pungency and balance. He isn't a devout Clinton admirer here; he sees the weaknesses of character, resolution and purpose that dog a politician who is masterful at playing politics but not so hot at deciding what he wants this mastery to deliver. More - with resonance for campaign 2008 - he demonstrates why co-presidencies sealed in the marriage bed are a dreadful idea, especially when two clever people with egos and tempers keep tripping over each other. (Would it be any better with President Hillary and Bill as first man? Surely not: unless Mr Clinton stayed in New York, phone off the hook, and let the wife get on with it.) What happened next, then? Slowly, painfully slowly, the President got a grip - and Leon Panetta as chief of staff. With a little help from Robert Rubin, he steered the economy back towards black (and showed Gordon Brown a real third way). He drove through the North American Free Trade Agreement by sheer force of personality. He began to sort out a Bosnia that inertia had seen slide into chaos. He had his own 'Diana moment' of eloquent empathy after the Oklahoma City bombs. He watched his wife sidle, chastened, towards the sidelines. He didn't change, Hamilton asserts, he merely got 'cleverer', more wise in the ways of Washington, more able to maximise his special talent. But not changing, too, meant showing imbecile frailty when a chubby young intern who'd boasted she'd have sex with him bared her bottom to the President and moved, too fast and much too easily, to first base. Maybe he was an inveterate predator. More likely, he's somewhere between a figure of natural, somehow unconscious sexual attraction and a political Rolling Stone. The Lewinsky affair begins in Hamilton Two but its denouement awaits Hamilton Three. Gennifer Flowers was Hamilton One. Paula Jones is basically Two, but spills into Three as Whitewater inquiries (orchestrated by a malevolent Ken Starr) change into a Paula problem and then into Monica. Bill Clinton, in office, is never free of his philandering past or present. Nor can he escape onslaughts from a Republican right led by a hate figure in Hamilton's pantheon to rival Starr. Enter Newt Gingrich. It's a disappointment, frankly, that Hamilton seems to become more partisan and less reflective as his hero fights back and zaps the forces of darkness, humiliating Speaker Newt over balance-the-budget blackmail, winning triumphant re-election in 1996. The book, as written, was apparently vastly too long and had to be cut. You can tell. Hillary fades abruptly out of any action; Gingrich doesn't get the psychoanalysis he deserves; Clinton himself strides from shambler to Superman somewhat too briskly. How can three volumes of biography, totalling 2,000 or more pages between them, still leave their subject short? The answers, in fact, are all on Hamilton's non-cutting side. He needs to take us through the crises - from Vince Foster's suicide to Black Hawk Down - in telling detail. He needs to capture the essence of Clinton by quoting him at length. He needs to chronicle a stretching list of accomplishments as well as fleshly failings. He needs to try to explain quite why a man of such talent, and essentially cautious views, excited such venomous opposition. It is a huge task, even for a trilogy. But, written with verve, researched with diligence, this is already the best and deepest assessment of Bill Clinton we have. And two lessons for contemporary politics stretch directly from it. One balefully remembers too much awful, obsessive reporting from great names such as the Wall Street Journal and Washington Post. Think (says Hamilton) that while Paula Jones dominated headlines in the spring of 1994, 'a million black Tutsis were murdered, without the US or UN lifting a finger'. The second means seeing an era whole. Clinton, on that view, has real claims to greatness. He delivered much more than slickness. But does his wife - in her tantrums, blinkered appointments and absence of charm - fare quite so well? She's cleverer with passing time, too, to be sure. But is she also much the same? Read all about them My Life by Bill Clinton<br /> Presidential memoir claiming to be 'the fullest account of presidency ever written'. A Vast Conspiracy: The Real Story of the Sex Scandal That Nearly Brought Down a President by Jeffrey Toobin <br />Spans the media frenzy from the Paula Jones lawsuit to the impeachment. A Woman in Charge: The Life of Hillary Rodham Clinton by Carl Bernstein <br />Watergate Pulitzer prize-winner Bernstein offers a revealing portrait of the Clinton marriage. Hillary Clinton: Her Way by Jeff Gerth and Don Van Natta Jr<br /> Examines Hillary's career in the light of the couple's '20-year plan'. The Natural: The Misunderstood Presidency of Bill Clinton by Joe Klein <br />Klein argues that, despite his personal failings, Clinton ran a serious, disciplined and responsible presidency. The Agenda: Inside the Clinton White House by Bob Woodward<br /> Draws on hundreds of interviews.