The Last Resistance by Jacqueline Rose Verso £16.99, pp256 It is not easy to be a dissenting Jew, not easy to ask the basic questions of justice and proportionality when Israeli jets strafe Gaza again. It takes a fierce shell of courage to speak out, as Jacqueline Rose does here, but it also takes inner courage from someone who, like Sigmund Freud, must inevitably be asked what's left of her that is Jewish once she's abandoned 'all the characteristics of her countrymen' and have to reply: 'A great deal and probably its very essence.' You can feel her pain throbbing through these essays. That does not make them an easy read. Rose's critique, weaving back and forth between Freud and Zweig, Grossman and Jabotinsky, is a dense tapestry of literature and psychoanalysis that seeks to define the nature of her race and her religion, then strip away the contortions of Zionism. It is David Grossman's particular gift, she writes, that 'he never underestimates Israel's terrible legacy of fear, but it isn't for him the great silencer ... when Grossman uncovers the wounds of the Jewish psyche, he reveals scar tissue which, as it hardens, will not let the nation breathe'. Rose does precisely that, too. She will take words such as 'evil' and turn them inside out in search of a simple meaning. Are we talking Osama bin Laden's 'evil' here, Tony Blair's 'shadows of evil' or 'evil' according to Ariel Sharon? Enter complexity and copious quotation. Exit simplistic warriors on barricades. So, with Stefan Zweig three-quarters of a century ago, we discover 'that Jewish nationalism is not and cannot be, by very dint of being nationalism, innocent'. So, with Vladimir Jabotinsky, founder of the Betar youth militants, we are reminded that 'Arabs are a people of dignity who cannot be bought', that Palestine 'is a country full of Arab memories'. We are asked to think afresh about the facile slogans of struggle, the interminable pledges of eyes for eyes and bombs for bombs. The essential text (Grossman again) concerns an Israel 'more militant, nationalist and racist then ever before'. It is too for Shulamith Hareven. 'It is as if all Zionism is dependent on our not knowing and not wanting to know' anything beyond a role as the 'eternal victim, alone in the world, who sits upright on his throne with his eyes closed, smothering all other peoples [especially the Arabs] and is always, always right with the cold, blind righteousness of the victim above whose head flutters the banner: "Vengeance is mine".' Anti-semitic? It's the instant cry of racism that would be directed against any non-Jew writing thus, but it doesn't hold when the writer herself and almost all those from whom she quotes are themselves Jews, ancient and modern. Rose's huge strength is to bring the weight of so much Jewish culture to bear. But for any non-Jewish reader, there are difficulties as well as benefits. One is to wonder how such oceans of relevance and eloquence have become dead seas along the beaches marked Sharon and Olmert, how all this intensity can count for so little when walls of wire must be stretched along the West Bank. If the Jewish state is full of cruel poison, then how does it nurture such richness in its literature or sensibility among its intellectuals? There is one dreadful answer here: that fear and embattlement changes everything. But beyond it lurks an even more dreadful hypothesis: that Judaism itself is not some special religion or definer of a special people, merely one race and creed among many, whose followers share the same capacity for brutality others have visited on them. Rose swims in the deepest waters of national psyche and helps us glimpse another Israel and a true force for peace in some distant world. She is not always convincing, particularly when denouncing the blunders of Blair or the potential Bush blunder of bombing Iran. There you glimpse a critic who transplants familiar theses on top of the facts and commands them to grow. But when she grapples with the contradictions of Jewish existence, she keeps scholarship close by her side. She is a fine, original scholar who adorns the terrible legacy she charts.