The Audacity of Hope  by Barack Obama  Canongate £14.99, pp375 The candidate is already 2007's champion fundraiser. He has momentum. Old Clinton stalwarts desert Hillary to serve at his side. It must be a Democrat for the White House next time, they say, and this guy, this eloquent, thoughtful, handsome, black guy, is the real deal. Why, didn't his quasi-autobiography cum manifesto, sell 1.3 million copies, top the New York Times list and win glowing reviews to boot? And didn't he write it (rather mellifluously) himself? Look, no ghost hands here! So The Audacity of Hope invites sterner scrutiny than your average political potboiler. It is a presidential calling card. It may be all our futures. And there is fascination as the pages turn. In one sense, Barack Obama defies easy categorisation: 'The child of a black man and white woman, born in the racial melting pot of Hawaii, with a sister who's half-Indonesian ... a brother-in-law and niece of Chinese descent, some blood relatives who resemble Margaret Thatcher and others who could pass for [black comedy actor] Bernie Mac.' No wonder family Christmases are like the United Nations General Assembly, he writes. No wonder, either, that he can open windows to a wider world of understanding. This isn't some stock chaser after high American office, a standard Wasp with a standard mindset. This is a genuinely interesting man from a singular family background, who still carries its lessons, memories and baggage with him. Obama spent years of austere, troubled childhood in Jakarta when his mother was married to a young Indonesian army officer. He saw pain, distress and poverty (and marriage breakdown) close up. It encircled him. He still knows, from experience, how to relate to those in need. He's a recognisable human being with a gift for empathy. Yes ... but is he a President? Does he know more about climate change than Al Gore, more about high office than Hillary Clinton, more about glad-handing and rubber-chicken dinners than John Edwards? There's the difficulty. Some of this personal credo arrives eloquent and moving. You can sense instinctively why Obama invites devotion. But then, because there's an election pending, you can also sense formulaic caution. The Guardian has an entertaining practice of dishing up potted reads, books of the day laconically stripped to the bone. Obama often invites that kind of dissection. Why The Audacity of Hope? Why not 'The Mendacity of Despair' or any permutation between? There's nothing particularly daring about the prudent non-specifics he peddles most of the time. (Indeed, his middle-way title might best have been 'The Sagacity of Further Thought'.) And his onerously repetitive chapter structure also casts a pall if you read too much, too fast. Take an event, maybe a day in the Senate, all personal achievements listed, a moment of prayer, a flying official visit to Iraq, then add anecdotes and personal conversations to taste. Obama could go hither and yonder by private jet, but he likes sweating in a coach and talking to ordinary Joes on the baggage line. Then build a brisk philosophical edifice on these emotions and encounters, opening out (as the 'Faith' chapter turns into the 'Race' chapter) into hints of what his policy might be when the time is ripe to formulate one. That's a realistic route if you want to mount a candidacy that is still standing in November 2008. But it's a bit of tedious tease for today, little helped by the new/old brand of politics he promulgates. Tired of confrontations between brutal neocons and old-style liberals locked in a time warp? Discover the joys of compromise and intelligent discussion with Obama: make positive consensus your theme for the 21st century. It is not a particularly invigorating thesis at this stage of development. It can be boiled down to the simple injunction: try to be nicer to people, wherever possible. And even Obama can't keep the sermonising going indefinitely. He has to reach back into history and hail the great god FDR (also worshipped by old liberals, one seems to remember). He has to plump for less tax on the poor and hard-working Americans, not more tax cuts for the rich and rapacious. He believes in Middle East peace, not war, and spoke out against Iraqi invasion before it happened (though that doesn't mean he wouldn't be tough in crisis). His wonderful wife and kids get a chapter of their own. So much, perhaps, is par for the campaign course. We shouldn't be disappointed. There are enough insights and memories to give (non-audacious) hope of something rather better if he gets in. But still the warning signs gather. Obama doesn't always win. He challenged for Congress in 2000 and lost badly. He 'began to harbour doubts about the path I had chosen'. He went through 'denial and anger' and 'came to appreciate how the Earth rotated around the sun and the seasons came and went without any particular exertion on my part'. And then his honed profile and splendid rhetorical skills got him a starring role at the 2004 Democratic Convention. He beat off a duff rival to a Senate seat. He made it to Washington and, maybe, four years later to the doors of the Oval Office. Do you sense a lurking lack of stamina, a slightly oddball compulsion to contemplation? Is the deal really real? Where's the fine line between empathy and sanctimony? Where's the depth of experience? But at least these are intriguing problems in a debate that's pounding along. And at least, with refreshing honesty, you can begin to make your own mind up early. You can move on - or rediscover hope. Senator Obama: man of letters 1995: Dreams From My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance, a memoir, in which Obama confessed to having taken drugs. 2004: Signed a $1.9m contract for three books. The first was The Audacity of Hope: Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream (2006). Next up, a children's book co-written by Obama's wife and children, with all proceeds going to charity. 2006: Wrote forewords to It Takes a Nation: How Strangers Became Family in the Wake of Hurricane Katrina and Real Men Cook: More than 100 Easy Recipes Celebrating Tradition and Family 2007: Obama's almost universal good press may change in July with the publication of David Mendell's Obama: The Ascent of a Politician. Mendell wrote about Obama's sex appeal in 2004 after he saw him enthusiastically kissing the wife of his Senate opponent on the cheek (the lady in question 'flushed and smiled broadly'). Rowland Manthorpe