Cameron: The Rise of the New Conservative  by Francis Elliott and James Hanning Fourth Estate £18.99, pp320 Ask a simple question and you get a dismayingly simple answer. Will the real David Cameron please stand up? And there he is, that affable, insouciant chap in the corner, the charming one who makes good jokes and delivers crisp extemporary speeches. He's an Oxford first, but doesn't do heavyweight intellectual. He's a bit of an Eton toff, but in no sense toffee-nosed. You'd probably like him if he sat down beside you and bought the beer. The two Independent on Sunday writers who produced this swift biography clearly did. Here's Cameron Mild, not Cameron Bitter. And that, to be fair, may be almost the truth of the matter. Elliott and Hanning have one or two modestly disreputable tales to tell, including the briefly famous one about the pot he puffed on the ancestral playing fields that (25 years later) blew a cloud of smoke across his leadership campaign. But, for much of the time, this is more hagiography than challenging biography, better on Tory background through the out-of-office years than headline fodder. That's not a criticism. You get a lot more useful information here than from, say, Tom Bower's hatchet job on Gordon Brown. Nevertheless, left to his own devices, a diligent reader might find one or two questions pending. Is there anything of a man with a mission here? At Brasenose, he toiled over books and ale, and moved with smooth speed from one girl to another. But politics, let alone the construction of a credo, barely rated a mention. He didn't do big things for the Conservative Club or in the Union. He mostly sat with his mates in the snug and let the rip tides of Thatcherism pass him by. And, when he came down, the first jobs he applied for, but didn't get, were in banking and management consultancy. Central Office's research department was an also-ran afterthought, mysteriously backed by some caller from the Palace nobody can put a name to now. There's a trace of William Boot here as Cameron, HQ's top expert on trade, is asked about the size of the trade gap by Mrs T and can't remember what it is. There's also a trace of more mordant Waugh when other romances fracture rather 'messily' - and one heartbroken gal moves to New York and becomes a nun before coming back to London as yet another management consultant. But none of this is heavy-duty stuff. Our Dave is quick on the uptake, briefing PMs and Chancellors. When the party loses, he always wins (and, indeed, Michael Howard pushes him forward in defeat). Some City scribblers didn't like his spinning as top PR at Carlton Communications, but at least he spun for himself - and got on famously with a demanding Michael Green. His wife is an Astor and a sentient asset as unpaid adviser. His Notting Hill set is too Tatler (and introverted) by half, but at least his devotion to his son, Ivan, with that dreadful Ohtahara epileptic syndrome, offers a more human grounding, just like his familial devotion to a father born with viciously painful foot deformities. So there's steel in the mix, too. What there isn't is anything Elliott and Hanning can really call the 'new Conservatism' - because, at root, David Cameron is probably a return to the pre-Thatcher ruling consensus. He's the sort of chap who'd have prospered if Willie Whitelaw, not Mrs T, had been leader. He puts his ear to the door and listens. He doesn't declaim. But what you see in these pages is surely what you'll get.