An Un-American Life: The Case of Whittaker Chambers  by Sam Tanenhaus Old Street Publishing £25, pp672 Different spook stories spook different countries. Britain still agonises compulsively over Burgess, McLean and Philby. How could the gilded youth of a generation get it so hideously wrong? But for America, the debate still revolves around Alger Hiss and subversion in the State Department, around the hysteria of the House Un-American Activities Committee, around Richard Nixon and visceral Joe McCarthy. Which, unavoidably, sets Whittaker Chambers at the heart of every debate. Chambers was a pudgy polemicist from a broken Long Island home who signed up for communism in the Twenties and became an active Soviet spy in the Thirties, before doing a total flip-flop and shopping his old friend Hiss to HUAC and thereafter enduring two long perjury trials as key witness for the prosecution. It is a complex and detailed tale, tackled with matching diligence and length in this exhaustive (and occasionally exhausting) biography from the distinguished senior editor of the New York Times Book Review. But the questions it asks flow as naturally now as they did 50 years ago. How, as Tanenhaus asks, can you avoid comparing the paranoia of red menaces past with the Islamo-fascism of wars against terror today? Why the constant appetite for threat as a glue for society? And how, more particularly, can you avoid fighting ideological battles using stereotypes that squeeze out human understanding? For the point about Chambers is that he doesn't fit the demon role that so many of America's great liberal casting directors (from Felix Frankfurter to Ed Murrow) almost automatically thrust upon him. He had brilliance, wit, insight, perspective and a certain insouciance, but he was also a mess. He lied about his ties to the Kremlin, then confessed. He lied about having proof of Hiss's guilt, then changed his mind. He moved, over four decades, from Bolshevik agitator to a star contributor alongside William F Buckley as the National Review was founded. The Hiss he denounced, like so many other government dabblers in treason, belonged to FDR's New Deal and thus put the Democrats themselves on indirect trial. Surely this Chambers guy was a flake, a romancer, a wild card, a tool of Republican zealots? You only had to see him sweating in the witness box to know that he was a bad hat. It was obvious, wasn't it? But Tanenhaus leaves no room for argument here. Chambers told the essential truth - Hiss was the liar. Hiss was a Stalin man. The liberals on the barricades got it wrong and traduced a formidable intellect who, time and again, let basic decency guide his trajectory. Chambers quit communism because he saw, close up, how corruptly and cynically it wasted lives. He quit Buckley's brigade when it grew too deep into 'crackpotism' and too close to McCarthy. He changed his mind for purpose. There was always method and reason to his apparent madness. That's a lesson worth learning at any time and Tanenhaus, with obvious affection and some awe for his subject, teaches it well. Start judging human beings by who they are and what they do, not how they fit into the latest pat thesis. He tells his long story fluently and gives the modern resonances full play. It is a considerable achievement. What he doesn't quite do, though, is break out of the box of purely American preoccupation. Chambers is not some global Everyman. He belongs in his time and his place. The Soviet Union he believed in and served through his youth was a fleeting vision, not reality. The Washington whose secrets and documents he helped steal and courier to Moscow was an oddly innocent spot, 'a big, beautiful village' wide open to espionage and seemingly just not bothered about it. And some of the tasks his spymaster gave him were simply dotty. Sneak aboard a Spanish freighter moored in Brooklyn harbour and, singlehanded, make sure the armaments it carries aren't diverted to help Franco. This is spying for the simple-minded. This isn't plotting, but pantomime. Two doubts intrude here. One, trailing the empty boxes and empty threats of WMDs in its wake, is the bumbling uncertainty of espionage old or new. Did anything that Hiss or Chambers passed along change history one whit? Did any of it matter, in the sense that duff intelligence about Saddam's stockpile mattered? Why tremble over a supposed revolution that American exceptionalism always made impossible? The other doubt, which applies just as much to Philby as to Hiss, is the conflation of media interest that gathers like a mushrooming cloud when you mention spies. Philby was a journalist, one of us. So was Chambers, a big man on the editorial board of Time magazine when the HUAC storms broke. The reporters in court knew him. His editors thought they knew him and for a while stood by him. Suddenly, the media found themselves in the dock as the gossip mill whirred. Suddenly, this was the biggest sensation in town, the stuff of constant headlines and even more constant allegations. So fascinating, so important, so stuffed with instant moralising ... so us! That isn't an entirely historical attitude. Mix Scooter Libby with Valerie Plame for an almost identical modern cocktail of self-absorption. Don't suppose that the press herd instinct that tried to trample Chambers died with his final heart attack. But do, I think, register the fact that hysteria and paranoia aren't the exclusive preserve of ambitious politicians and the voters they seek to steer through the latest minefield of awful threats. The press made another muck of it here, too. The press couldn't cope with nuance or indecision. The only good thing, half a century later, is that a press man like Sam Tanenhaus has turned up to level the score.