Conrad and Lady Black: Dancing on the Edge  by Tom Bower  Harper Press £20, pp448 Against all odds, you begin to feel a twinge of sympathy for Lord Black of Crossharbour. It is three years since his world collapsed, yet his day in court still lies far away. Lawyers scuttle round racking up obscene fees; chums who once gorged at his table turn their backs; now along comes grim literary reaper Tom Bower, preparing another of his killer investigations. Will Conrad co-operate? Tom asks innocently. No fear! says Lord B; I know you're writing the story of 'two sleazy, spivvy, contemptible people who enjoyed fraudulent and unjust elevation'. Well, he certainly got the plot right. Our difficulty is knowing when the plot quite fits the story. That may be as much a Bower difficulty as a Black one. The premier bloodhound of British journalism has done his standard post-Rowland, post-Maxwell job: 150 interviews, 434 pages, a formidable array of facts and fiddles. The bewildering business of 'non-compete fees' and loans from one dodgy shell company to another has never seemed clearer. It is, indeed, a masterly performance. Yet you need a little human understanding in the mix as well. And that - see also his attempted demolition of Gordon Brown - is not Bower's forte. 'Nowhere in Black's education or experience was there any sympathy for the anonymous, simple, honest masses, born underprivileged and without special talents,' he announces . Would God like to second the motion? What we have here, largely repeating previous Canadian dissections, is a simple immorality tale. Bright, brutal boy from Toronto's Bay Street elbows innocent widows aside to take over company, buys and strips small community newspapers, snaffles the Daily Telegraph for a song, develops delusions of political grandeur, marries Barbara Amiel, Fleet Street's most 'pulchritudinous' Lady Macbeth - and flies too close to the sun. Come in Palm Beach, we have financial meltdown! See the great and the good, the Kissingers and Carringtons, who liked you when the going was good, walk away. You are skewered - or Bowered - by your greed and monstrous ego. RIP. It doesn't all fit, though. For one, predictable, thing, we need to know the names of the unspecified 150 who gave Tom his interviews. Did David Radler, for instance, donate a private hour with a tape-recorder? Radler, the adjective 'rat-faced' ritually appended to his every appearance, was Conrad's sidekick from day one, the partner who ran the North American wings of empire. When I was in Chicago a couple of years ago, they saw him as Iago to Black's Othello. Yet here, Old Rodent Face slides curiously in and out of the action. He's often 'distant', estranged, peripheral. Yet when the going gets truly tough and everything is falling apart, he's right back at the centre, contriving ever-more desperate schemes (before copping a plea bargain and preparing to dish the dirt for a short sentence). Why such soft focus for Ratty? It could be Woodward's Law ('Spill the beans to me and you'll smell of roses'); it could be a dramatic desire to set Conrad alone at web centre; it could be true perception. But a fuzziness lingers. One moment, his lordship is crass, crude and bullying; the next, he's light, funny and warm-hearted. One moment, he connives and lies, the next, unshaven, tieless, he converts to Catholicism and nips down to Brompton Oratory of a Sunday morning. One moment, he drains a pension fund; the next, he produces a compendious, perfectly respectable biography of FDR. Black, in short, is a complex figure. And so is Amiel, the newspaper columnist who turns into Imelda Marcos before our very eyes. Lady B has been a bit of goer in the past, apparently. Bower spends rather too much time interrogating 'friends' of Babs who clearly can't stand her or her man-eating ways. He repeatedly rehearses the wonders of her 'physique' (i.e. breasts) without doing the vital investigative job of establishing 36DD. But what of her equally fabled 'intelligence', the wit-filled conversations over the cleavage? Suddenly, she's dumb - too dumb to see that hubby's no billionaire, too dumb to realise how devoutly he worships her, and too dumb not to bail out when everything turns to sick and tears. It doesn't make sense. It's personality painting by numbers. Maybe that doesn't matter. Maybe the incisive exposure of 'crooked charlatans' (Black's phrase) is enough. But if you want understanding as well as facts, you'll just possibly end up asking for more.