Mayflower: A Voyage to War<br />by Nathaniel Philbrick<br />HarperCollins, £20, pp480 History is at its most potent when the lessons of yesterday flow naturally into today. Here, brilliantly constructed, is a river of resonance. We have warlords and constantly shifting alliances, treachery, bribery, bungling. We have religious extremism, racial hatred, military carnage and cover-ups. This could be Afghanistan or Iraq, as bloodily relevant as the latest roadside bomb. Instead, across four centuries, Nathaniel Philbrick offers us the New England of the Mayflower pilgrims, the benign myths that helped shape modern America and what really happened. He tells two essential tales separated by the moral corrosion of 50 years. The first, often inspiring in its fortitude, sees a young corduroy worker called William Bradford help lead his Puritan flock from exile in the Netherlands to the promise of Plymouth Rock. These settlers die in huge numbers from starvation and disease. Only a friendship forged with the Pokanoket Indians and their chief, Massasoit, gives them hope, then prosperity. But the one, over time, kills the other. In the beginning, the Indians trade and prosper as partners. Too soon, though, the market in furs changes and they have nothing left to sell except their land, which means the ability to feed themselves. Gradually, they become hungrier, poorer, more desperate while the second generation of Mayflower pilgrims and the sons of the 'Strangers' who came with them - religious asylum seekers and economic migrants thrust together on a single ship - look on with mounting scorn. Massasoit's son, Wamsutta, is chief now and vows that no more land will be sold. He dies in suspicious circumstances and his young brother, Philip, seeks a policy that may see his tribe survive. But the white men see no point in helping him. They stumble into the slaughter called 'King Philip's War'. What follows is sometimes unbearably tragic. In 15 months - from May 1675 to August 1676 - Plymouth Colony sees 8 per cent of its men fall in battle, almost double the Civil War killing rate. And a Native American population that once totalled 20,000 counts 2,000 lost in battle, 3,000 dead of sickness and starvation, 1,000 shipped away as slaves and 2,000 more doomed to wander far afield in search of a new home. The casualties and the aftermath are brutal. Worse, brutality consumes both sides as they struggle for supremacy. Take the 'Great Swamp Fight' that later American writers hailed as 'one of the most glorious victories ever achieved in our history'. But 200 English troops, out of a thousand, are dead or wounded; and perhaps 600 men, women and children from the Narrangansett tribe are burnt to death in the remnants of the fort they built as security against being dragged into the Pokanokets' war. English 'intelligence' wasn't up to deducing that, however. It predicted an attack which never came and mindlessly drove what was left of the Narrangansett to take King Philip's side. We are in an echo chamber of horrors here. Who do the English, with their old flintlock guns and creaking European battlefield routines, remind you of? Where did the Indians get the guns they used to such surprising effect? (Yes, from English arms dealers). Who does the bedraggled figure of Philip himself, left roaming the wilderness with only handful of supporters by his side yet still possessing a famed power to inspire, bring to mind somewhere on the Hindu Kush? Philbrick develops none of these parallels himself, but his gift for understanding, for shrewd humanity, makes the process natural and inevitable. This is more than a small, forgotten war in the first days of America's development. It is a case study in folly, fear and ignorance. The Native Americans helped the earliest of the pilgrims survive. They became wise friends, not enemies. Forgetfulness pushed them to extremes and almost annihilated them, yet, in the decisive encounters that finally destroyed this rebellion, it was other, loyal Indians who tipped the balance. Read the lessons and wince. Maybe today, on one estimate, there are more than 35 million descendants of those Mayflower pilgrims living in America. It's good that they can read this enthralling, scholarly book and know where they came from: with pride, but also, like all of us, with the pain of self-recognition.