Mencken: the American Iconoclast<br />by Marion Elizabeth Rodgers<br />Oxford University Press £19.99, pp662 Journalism, wrote HL Mencken towards the end of his career, 'is a fleeting thing, and the man who devotes his life to it writes his history in water'. When he died, almost exactly 50 years ago, he left instructions to colleagues on the Baltimore Sun: no biographical sketches, no pictures, no editorial hymning of achievements, please - just a terse death announcement. The most resonant name in American newspapers wished (metaphorically) to put on his coat one final time, close the office door and steal away, collar turned high against excessive eulogy. They didn't obey him, of course. Mencken was given an obituary and feted in excelsis, as he still is. And now a walloping, meticulously scholarly biography adds perhaps the last few hundred thousand words to a reputation he would surely have shrugged away. For, at heart, this gruff, iconoclastic guy was right about himself and his trade. There's a hole in your bucket, dear Henry, and the water of history pours through it. Where does the magic of Mencken lie? In his relentless energy, his range - from sympathetic literary criticism to joyous invective; in his sometimes heedless courage, plunging head first into fiery controversy where others tiptoed away. He could roll his sleeves up and produce you a paper from the ashes of a print room after devastating fire. He could edit abrasive pages of comment, and write most of the unsigned blasts himself. He was a brilliant, pithy reporter whose dispatches from party conventions spanned two world wars, sumptuous reference points from Teddy Roosevelt to Harry Truman. And in style and temperament, he was an actor manager. He swaggered, dominated, jeered and inspired. He was, as Sid Perelman said, 'the ultimate firework'. But because of all this, because of the millions on millions of words he churned out between 20 and 70, he was also an operator full of tricks and techniques. His columns, on inspection, were mostly contrarian. Take a prevailing pillar of wisdom and knock it flat. Many of his views changed bewilderingly and often, as they were bound to. He was a force on the day: bracing exercise to be taken on a Baltimore morning with your blueberry muffin. Next day, though, the breeze might change. Do we revere the Mencken who wrote that 'the Negro (brain) is not fitted for the higher forms of mental effort', or the Mencken who championed black rights? Do we follow Mencken, valiant for truth in the Scopes trial, or Mencken giving Adolf Hitler the gentlest of rides as the Nazis took power? ('So a few fat Jews had their behinds bumped and now you are arguing that Germany is unfit to live in.') Was he essentially American, or German American with a soft spot for the Kaiser? Why did Mencken hate FDR so long and vehemently, championing even Alf Landon against him and going down in flames? Marion Elizabeth Rodgers has a fundamental difficulty. She's chronicling a great man. Some of what he wrote - say, The American Language - stands proud still. But some of it is haplessly ephemeral, locked in time and place like a Bernard Levin or Richard Littlejohn column. To claim Mencken's views on the Middle East were 'prophetic', for instance, is really to say no more than that he penned a few pieces that stand the test of events. 'The truth that survives is the lie it is pleasantest to believe,' he said as his finest Free Lance series of columns in the now-defunct Evening Sun ended under duress in 1915. Precisely. It is pleasant to believe that Mencken was a wonderful human being. He wasn't, as Rodgers's accounts of his personal fulminations and fornications show all too clearly; he was a tetchy, untrustworthy genius. He confected one lead story (and probably more) so monstrously that Jayson Blair would have withered in his shade. His legend lives through the eyes and pens of others who tell us how wonderful he was, though we cannot feel it for ourselves. He was a firecracker constantly exploding in the bland backyards of America and sounding louder because of the surrounding silence. Rodgers serves him well, and always devotedly: but he was a creature of his time, not the prophet it would be pleasant to hymn. Mencken, a supreme hack with a hole in that bucket: he would ask for nothing more.