The Awful End of Prince William the Silent<br />by Lisa Jardine<br />HarperCollins £12.99, pp144 Some assassinations - one finger, one trigger - change the world forever: take Lee Harvey Oswald or the Wagnerian reverberations of Sarajevo in 1914. But where did it all begin? When did the first assassin, alone or part of a wider plot, deranged or clinically cool, shoot the first victim of renown and alter the course of history in a trice? Meet Balthasar GŽrard, 25, a Catholic dogsbody from a village near the French town of Besanon who, in July 1584, brought the news that the Duke of Anjou was dead to William of Orange (he was called the Silent because he didn't say very much) and shot him three times with a small, wheel-lock pistol, thus becoming the founder member of the Dishonourable Company of Mysterious Assassins. What happened next? Good Queen Bess had been dithering for ages over whether William and his Orange revolution against Spain's hegemony in the Low Countries just across the North Sea was worth supporting. The Silent One had been holding his accumulation of mini-states and provinces together by force of Protestant personality. He had survived one attempt to kill him. But now he was gone and something had to be done. England squared up to Philip II of Spain. The Armada sailed - and the rest is triumphant English history. Lisa Jardine is one of the editors as well as one of the authors of this 'Making History' series, which aims to take great turning points and - pithily, wittily - distil them into 140 pages or so. This, the first assassination of a head of state with a pistol, fits that bill almost perfectly. Do you want to know why the Dutch football team wear orange? Or why the Ulster marchers perform their baffling rituals on cue? Or (at least tangentially) why the tangled forest that is the English monarchy swapped family trees? Or why everything, 500 years later, is different, but also much the same? Then this is an enthralling train ride of a book, light, swift and perfectly prepared. Don't expect Professor Jardine to get too bogged down by all of this. The lessons are gently drawn here, the basic stance is 'Just fancy that!' Connections are made cautiously, almost diffidently. The fundamental lesson - that wild men with guns and no security clearance can up-end all of us and our supposed certainties - is tragically obvious. But this is still an engrossing, spritely read. History can, indeed, be made in a bloody second, as Balthasar GŽrard proved. The speculation over who and why and what it was all about is standard whenever a bullet flies. And, in a way, with a sinking heart, you could indeed say that modern history began in July 1584.