The Laughter of Triumph<br />by Ben Wilson<br />Faber £16.99, pp356 A day is a long time in journalism, just one damned deadline after another. Where do we come from? Why do we ply our trade in a certain grooved way? Nobody pauses to think or ask. But journalism has its own history, too, from Thomas Nash and Defoe to 'the inveterate John Bull' called William Cobbett. And now, at long last, William Hone rejoins that illustrious throng. For almost two decades at the beginning of the 19th century, round, bluff, affable Hone was the most famous journalist and editor in the land. His father was an undistinguished lawyer's clerk. What education Hone scratched together he mostly made for himself. Yet he not only loved books, but made a living from them from time to time; he developed a fizzing, fiery writing style that used the extremities of literary invention to devastating effect. William Hone's journalism was passionate and committed. Hone knew the enemies he faced: Lord Ellenborough, a crusty disgrace of a Lord Chief Justice; Viscount Sidmouth, Home Secretary for 10 repressive years; Lord Liverpool, the greyest Prime Minister of them all - and the fat, lascivious toad of a Prince Regent who became George IV. He also knew, with equal passion, what he desired: the reform of a rotten, self-serving parliamentary system that made the House of Commons a suppressor of democracy. He poured out pamphlets by the score, started weekly magazines and daily papers, launched devastating investigations, produced thumping bestsellers. He was a compulsive writer, an indefatigable toiler. And, most memorably, he faced his establishment foes three times in court and, by winning over juries of good men and true rather than corrupt Tory placemen, by making them see where truth and decency and their own best interests lay, he made permanent, crucial gains for press freedom. Criminal libel was never the same again, a tool of legal repression without practical use. Judges and politicians no longer fudged together laws of sedition and blasphemy as they went along. Democracy grew stronger, more assertive. He was Hone the national hero. But, within a few years, he was also Hone the discarded. Canning took charge, reforms gathered pace, the gales of the 1810s and 1820s turned to more benign breezes. William Hone's satires lost their edge and their audience. The great man himself, forever pursued by debt, always the victim of his own generosity, was reduced to running a failing coffee shop and then to scratching a living as a subeditor on an obscure weekly. His health was shot, beset by stroke after stroke; he died in the obscurity of Peckham, surrounded by a loving family and profound forgetfulness. Why remember him now? Because, in the shadow of 9/11, politicians and judges are fingering their weapons of mass compulsion again. Because distrust, deceit and unpopular Princes of Wales are ever with us. Because, eerily, the fights against criminal libel of 200 years ago are also today's fights in Zimbabwe and Burma and wherever autocracy lives in a globalised world. Because the fight goes on. But The Laughter of Triumph is much more than a collection of simple, scathing lessons. It is history, our forgotten history, written with fluency, diligence and wisdom. Ben Wilson may be only 25, a very young man making his literary way, but he is already an exceptional talent. Hone used parody and scorn as his broadswords: he laughed his oppressors to defeat. Imagine the Attorney General reading out the charges against Hone's 'Political Catechism' in court: 'Thou shalt have no other patron but me ... thou shalt not support any measure but mine ... thou shalt not take the pension of the Lord thy minister in vain.' And they wanted to lock him away or fine him into extinction for this. Imagine a jury scanning George Cruikshank's acrid cartoons and sketches, Hone's finest accompaniments. 'It is perhaps a curiosity of British history that laughter was the spring of liberty,' Wilson writes. 'It seems so trivial; hardly a motor of change, the stuff of heroic resistance to repression, but laughter is impossible to silence.' And so, from Nash to Swift to Pope to Hone, it remains. Bremner, Bird and Fortune spring from undergrowth grown luxuriant on derision over centuries; Steve Bell draws with the venom of Gillray and Cruikshank; the prime of Bernard Levin was very like the prime of Hone. To some readers, Richard Littlejohn's Sun jousts are vicious affronts, but, in their crude, cruel humour, they have ancient roots. The Daily Mail that polite society loves to loathe is all of a piece with the Black Dwarfs and Critical Reviews that kicked down freedom's doors. (And, whether we care to recall it or not, The Observer was a timid Establishment voice as Hone fought to prove the innocence of poor, traduced Eliza Fenning, a cook accused of poisoning her employers.) Ashes to ashes, dust to dust, newspapers to fish-and-chip wrapping. The crusaders of one moment become recycled cardboard the next. Hone was always in the thick of the struggle, existing from day to desperate day. He was the essential British journalist and he is also a vital part of our history, here memorably called from the morgue of oblivion into the light of another passing day.