Hitler's Piano Player<br />by Peter Conradi<br />Duckworth £20, pp352 The haunting question here, brooding over the life and times of Ernst Hanfstaengl, the Fhrer's international version of Alastair Campbell, is whether this is history replayed as farce or macabre farce from beginning to bitter end? 'Putzi' Hanfstaengl provides some of the necessary answers, of course: bumbling, affable, terminally wedged down a crack between National Socialism and the Good Chaps Society. From the Reichstag fire to internment at Butlins, Clacton-on-Sea, in two hundred or so uneasy stumbles. But though Putzi is the star of this wholly entertaining biography, he is also strangely peripheral (final casting for the screen version might reasonably feature any mix and match of Hugh Grant, Bill Deedes, Boris Johnson and Julian Fellowes). So Hanfstaengl was a bit of a card - what does that tell us about the pack of jokers he tagged along with? What do we learn of the early Adolf as he clawed his way from Munich to Berlin? For this is a life-on-the-road road movie before he was famous. In the Munich of the early Twenties, Hitler made ripples, not waves. See the little ex-corporal turning up for salon suppers in a trench-coat, carrying his dog whip. He latches on to Putzi, a not very successful fine art dealer just returned from New York with an expensive German-American wife, and they stage their Nazi version of Pygmalion. 'But, madam, you must tell me how to eat this thing - I never saw one before.' That's an artichoke, Adolf. And, while you're at it, would you please think about growing a more imposing moustache - and stop burying your head in my crotch? ('Look,' says Madam Hanfstaengl severely, 'this won't do, Herr Hitler.') What does Putzi wonder about Rudolph Hess? Whether he and Adolf are having it off. How does Hitler keep the wolf from the door? By writing opinion pieces for the papers at £1,000 a time. Who's that snoring on the front parlour sofa? It's Gring, exhausted by an evening at the theatre. And Hitler and Goebbels are wanting some tea. This, you may think, is pure 'Springtime for Hitler', more Mel Brooks than wintry menace. But the testimony - from Putzi and others - is direct and the impact, by turns, hilarious and chilling. On the one hand, these are fallible, flatulent politicians, scrabbling round for funds and a hint of success. They can't stage a decent putsch, let alone rule the world. The leader, with his blue eyes and unquenchable eloquence, has a certain class on a public platform, but otherwise they're ignorant and inept and uncouth, which is why couth Putzi flourishes among them, using long words and playing the piano on demand. But their very banality, on the other hand, sounds an alarm. What other piddling parties outside the mainstream can we think of, in France, Italy, the Netherlands, in Britain? Aren't they just as amateurish, just as racked by personal rivalries and farcical rows? They may have nothing in common with the National Socialists of 80 years ago, except for the feebleness of their initial challenge and the chaos of their organisation. But don't laugh. Look, with Putzi, at what can happen next ... Peter Conradi has written an account of the beginnings of evil that doesn't end in the wreckage of Berlin. He also, chronicling Hanfstaengl's years at Harvard and selling the cream of European art to the cream of Manhattan, reminds us of a lost but relevant era when American society (like British society) and German society were deeply interwoven, when Germany wasn't 'the enemy' but the friend that gave Windsor its royals and FDR his party invitations. Putzi crossed over and joined the good guys in 1939, but it wasn't quite the Rubicon you might imagine. He had, absolutely naturally, a foot in both camps. He was a man of interlocking worlds. And this didn't mean that he had to change convictions as though they were a suit of clothes. When British intelligence recruited him, he solemnly insisted that the 'destruction of Hitlerism must not mean the rehabilitation of German Jewry'. Thus, 'blond Englishman must speak to blond German'. Thus, this 'naively amiable man', as the New York Times put it, did his turncoat bit and wandered into years of internment, wondering why his new chums had been so tough on a good chap trying to help. There's one more chill in store as Hanfstaengl is shuttled from camp to camp, wishing someone would give him a piano to tinkle. Can he write another article knocking Hitler? enquire his Whitehall PR friends. Only from captivity, says the Home Office: 'There can be no question of releasing this man who is probably the most dangerous of all internees.' Even 60-plus years ago, they were singing their siren song.