The Moral State We're In  <br />by Julia Neuburger <br />400pp, HarperCollins, £16.99 Here, a full decade after Will Hutton's economic prospectus for Blair's bright new Britain, comes its more emotional sibling. And the damnable thing, when you examine Julia Neuburger's chronicle of the oppressed and forgotten - the old, the mentally ill, the asylum seekers and prison inmates, the neglected young - is that she could just as easily have been writing about 1995 as 2005. For every supposed step forward, there is often one step back. Take the wonders of modern medicine, prolonging active and inactive life. But that leaves us with a million people aged 85 and beyond - and nearly 400,000 over 90. Extrapolate 30 years hence and 85-plus numbers will have grown 138%: more Alzheimer's, more demands on high-dependency units, more desperate or callous families washing their hands of the problem. What do we do next? Raise the retirement age so that fit 70-year-olds are still toiling, still paying their taxation way? Or begin to talk more intensively about where euthanasia fits? Because Neuburger spent six years as CEO of the King's Fund, she is particularly shrewd on the ethical choices of life and death and the practical choices of hospital care (which drain human contact between patients and nurses, sisters of technocracy rather than mercy). There is a painful theme here, one to haunt anyone who feels the passage of the years. When, in decrepitude, do you become an object, a burden, an encumbrance? But this, towards the extremities of personal despair, is where Neuburger's "manifesto" begins to lose some of its force. She sees hope for pensioners as they get their grey power act together. She hopes that the mentally ill will be better tended if we pay social workers better. She traces the benefits that immigration has brought to Britain and wants to let asylum seekers work. She looks at the prisoners Britain locks away - the number of women up by 140% in eight years, the number of young people doubling, the proportionate numbers worse than Libya, Burma and Turkey - and laments the brutal profligacy of it all. Yet (unlike Hutton, who had a theory about the way economic society should work) there isn't really an over-arching idea here. Sometimes the sound of pensioners trooping to the polling booths is supposed to bring hope. Sometimes politicians are supposed to do unpopular things because they're right, and spend money in ways they'll never be thanked for. Sometimes we - the ordinary citizens - are supposed to become kinder and gentler of our own accord. This isn't quite a manifesto, then. It is, as Neuburger's publishers claim, the cry of a brave liberal voice in a wilderness of selfishness and fear - but, in its diagnoses and remedies, it is still ad hoc. It demands that something must be done, but can't quite decide who should do it. It has many targets - from insurance-risk aversion in bureaucratic places to the shambles of care in a community that doesn't care - and can't hit them all consistently. Perhaps that is inevitable, because the plights of the weakest are many and various, insoluble by a single stroke of resolution. Nevertheless, you still can't get away from the basic difficulty that dogs almost every awful case and injustice Neuburger cites: the fault, dear friends, lies in ourselves, because we are democrats voting in a democracy that purports to put us and our tax breaks and hospital waiting times and education choices first. We vote for what we want, not for what the kids in Feltham need. We prioritise personally, automatically; and this means that grey voting power, even if it comes to exist, will simply strip resources away from some of Neuburger's other sad cases for urgent treatment. So this is a passionate, provoking, often profoundly depressing book, vibrant in analysis, uncertain on solutions. It asks for moral force in a landscape where faith has left the city and priests talk of famine in Africa or gay bishops rather than what's happening under their noses. It sees the compassion of tsunami response, and fails to find it behind our own front doors. It makes us flinch at the state we're in.