Histories of the Hanged by David Anderson (Weidenfeld &amp; Nicholson £20, pp406)<br />Britain's Gulag by Caroline Elkins (Jonathan Cape £20, pp475) Before there was Guantnamo Bay and Abu Ghraib, there was Hola and Mwea and Manyani. Before we grow too puffed with outrage over American arrogance and atrocity, there was Kenya in the 1950s, a permanent stain on Britain and our erstwhile 'civilising mission' to a wider world. And now, in a double publishing whammy, we have no excuse - no excuse at all - for not knowing what brutalities and corruptions were inflicted in our name; nor any excuse for not recognising how fatally easily it could happen again. By one of those great publishing conjunctions, David Anderson, lecturer in African studies at St Antony's College, Oxford, and Caroline Elkins, assistant professor of history at Harvard, have chosen the same era - the years of the Mau Mau uprising - and the same basic remit for their research. You may, half a century on, just remember the ruckus over Hola camp and the beating to death of 10 of its Kikuyu inmates, a scandal that rocked Harold Macmil lan's government to its roots. But you will surely not remember 'the Pipeline' of organised repression of which Hola was only a part: the systematic confinement without trial of tens of thousands of Kikuyu in 'detention camps' which were gulags, the wholesale torture and murder of prisoners, the executions conducted without any real pretence at justice. For there never was an inquiry that came close to the truth and Whitehall, in its memorial way, contrived to lose most of the relevant paperwork. Shame and silence drew a veil over so much viciousness, officially sanctioned and condoned. Here, twice over, that veil is ripped aside. There are differences in the two authors' approaches, to be sure. Professor Elkins, younger, American, more naturally hostile to colonialism and British establishment blah, interviewed survivors and survivors' families for months on end. Much of her testimony is first-hand, vivid and centres on the 50 camps where perhaps 160,000 Africans (or perhaps many more) were detained without trial in conditions to make the stomach crawl. She gags on the hypocrisy and cant and suffering. It makes her angry - and that anger shows. Anderson, by contrast, is an older hand. He is cooler and better at British politics - and what particularly incenses him are the 1,090 Kikuyu we hanged, by special court decree, between 1953 and 1956. The death penalty was on its way out back home, but here, with an almost insouciant savagery, it was profligately used to cow and terrify. Texas couldn't compete. His wider indictment is both clinical and chilling. 'In the midst of the war, draconian anti-terrorist laws were introduced, suspending the human rights of subjects, imposing collective punishments, facilitating detention without trial, permitting the seizure of property of convicts and vastly extending the death penalty to a wide range of offences... the Kikuyu districts of Kenya became a police state in the very fullest sense of that term.' There is, on the evidence, no arguing with that. Both books, in their copious documentation, leave scant room for debate. The Mau Mau rebellion was callous on both sides, hard in its dismal detail to countenance, let alone defend. But the statistics of lives lost in action (from Anderson) characterise it most precisely: 32 European settlers dead, 1,800 African civilians, 3,000 African police and soldiers, and at least 12,000 rebels. In short, it was Africans who died and Africa that suffered. Reasons why? Elkins and Anderson don't disagree about much: their studies are more complementary than contradictory. Take a large helping of drossy white settlers, a weak governor and local administration, an avaricious land programme that had left the Kikuyu desperate and a blinkered, distracted Colonial Office and what did you get? Imbecile policy, like locking up Jomo Kenyatta. Gangster policy, like spawning hit squads under officially sanctioned assassins. Corrupt policy that kept eyes averted when the camps were mentioned. This was the flailing politics of fear and hysteria at its most amoral. But it is impossible to read on without sensing a deeper contemporary relevance. At one level, the story of what we allowed to happen to Kenya is a giant corrective. Britain may sneer at French frailties in Algeria or Israeli raids inside the West Bank, but, in the wrong place at the wrong time, we were full, functioning members of the wild bunch. Civil service integrity and ministerial piety went for nothing. The press was too dozy. Parliament - putting gallant warriors like Barbara Castle and Fenner Brockway to one side - was pretty toothless. Ministers ritually covered their backs. That can't be the end of it, though. This, as Governor Baring wrote to his masters back home, was a kind of war. 'Mau Mau suspects are a type who, in another form of action, would become prisoners of war.' This, at the bloody close of Hola, was a 'real jam' (in Macmillan's words) to be wriggled out of via rubber-toothed inquiries with constrained terms of reference. This was a disgrace that nobody involved at or near the top took any responsibility for. Sounds familiar? The crunching relevance of Kenya is that, in panic and prejudice, this is much, much more than history. This is the way, perhaps, that we can all let ourselves behave in a real jam. This is the once and continuing dark side we can never escape - or honestly acknowledge, whether in Falluja or the Kikuyu camps of long ago. This is where we have been, and may stray again.