The Edwardians<br />by Roy Hattersley<br />Little, Brown £25, pp520 A quarter of a century ago, Roy Hattersley was a Premier League politician who loved to write for relaxation. Now he is a prolific and talented writer who fits in a little politics on the side. The Edwardians confirms his transformation. It is a panoramic view of the first 14, formative years of the last century. It is also a labour of continuing love, painstakingly researched, pungently written and utterly professional. Once, perhaps, a younger Hattersley would have set Clem Attlee alongside Len Hutton in his pantheon of ultimate heroes - but, increasingly, a literary Roy Jenkins also rates a place at that top table. Why, though, expend quite so much toil on an era already stacked high with histories and biographies (including Roy on Asquith and Churchill)? We've been here before. What's the point of patrolling over and over again? Two reasons: one suitably scholarly, one less high-minded and decorously hidden from view. The scholarly pitch boasts three new sources (including the diaries of Victor Cavendish MP, later the ninth Duke of Devonshire) and a slim, new thesis. Did you think of the Edwardian years as a sun-dappled interlude of hedonism and forgetfulness, a final balmy calm before the great storm of 1914-18? If you did, forget it. This was the cusp of change, the moment when our world began. Bring on the motor car and the aeroplane; bring on the beginnings of modern medicine, modern political parties and the modern welfare state (starring William Beveridge as a newspaper reporter). Whichever way Edward VII was looking (when he wasn't peering down Mrs Keppel's cleavage) his subjects were looking to the future. It is a pleasantly stimulating refrain, well sung and wittily argued. All Hattersley's years exploring the nitty-gritty of social policy make for a case that passes technical as well as emotional muster. He knows education and health and pensions, and it shows. But, in truth, this isn't a quite resilient enough theme to sustain a work of such physical weight. You can frame it as cogently over five or 50 pages as 500 (and the Cavendish contributions - hitherto unpublished, probably for good reason - don't add much). No: the more secretive pleasure of these Edwardians has little to do with academic theorising and much more to do with sheer, almost garrulous enjoyment. Hattersley clearly had a whale of a time pulling his anecdotes and analyses together, and we're welcome at the party. Did so many things, in fact, come to fruition through those 14 years? Not really. The era itself is essentially an artificial construct, as hollowly convenient as a newspaper end-of-the-year retrospective. Edward was a roistering buffoon long before he came to the throne, and would probably have been Hon. Pres. of Bath Rugby Club to this day as a line of drink-sodden princelings queued to take a pop at Stan Collymore. The Irish problem became hugely more problematic, but wasn't solved. The House of Lords hangs around even now, an albatross in ermine (with Lord Hattersley on hand to testify). The bitterness of the Boer War didn't save us after Sarajevo. Liberal England still took a long, long time to die. Nor, in strict terms, do many of the chapters here even attempt to fit the thesis. Scott and Shackleton's Antarctic failures presaged nothing more visionary than a continuing, lugubrious, public fascination with gallant flops (or ungallant ones such as the Titanic). The cricketing exploits of 'Gentleman Gilbert' Jessop were no different in kind from those of 'Lord Ted' Dexter seven or so decades later. Bombardier Billy Wells's glass chin was as vulnerable as Billy Walker's. Why and how must John Buchan, Henry James and WB Yeats stand side by side? But very little of this matters as the pages turn swiftly. The Edwardians, at root, is a celebration rather than a dissection. There was poverty to be sure, some of it grinding, but this was still a good time to be alive. The political correspondents had great stories to relay and great characters to follow. Lloyd George, on the stump for his Budget, vowed that 'with your help, we can brush the Lords like chaff aside'. Churchill, pursued by furious Pankhursts, announced that now 'nothing will induce me to vote for giving votes to women'. Both of those sagas are meat and drink to Hattersley. He recounts them with verve, clarity and relish. Politics is politics, whatever the era. Do the personalities change? Perhaps Balfour, reclining indolently on a Commons front bench, belonged to the age of Victoria, while Lloyd George - all blazing fervour and low cunning - was a more recognisable manipulator, a spin doctor who bowled his own googlies. Maybe Churchill is worth the ripe, detailed treatment he gets here because some of us remember him or recognise him from faded newsreels, whereas Asquith, any physical remembrance lost, is treated a touch perfunctorily. But some simple facts have a way of coming from nowhere and hitting you between the eyes. Lib-Lab pacts? They began almost a hundred years ago because Asquith needed pale pink support. Trade union militancy? Congress was a big, plump, pussy cat. Inferiority complexes? Time and again, we trailed in enviously behind Germany (the America of its day). Hattersley knows how to pick up contemporary relevancies and draw striking parallels, always alive and strikingly alert. This is a rich fruitcake of a book, full of plums and the best kind of entertainment: the one that instructs as it rolls along.