Shooting History<br />by Jon Snow<br />HarperCollins £20, pp395 Britain's answer to Dan Rather (and, indeed, to the entire School of Cronkite) is the son of a C of E bishop who worked his way haplessly through minor public schools and Scarborough Technical College. His A-level haul makes no sort of grade. Liverpool University eventually grew tired of too much pastiche Cohn-Benditry and threw him out. Yet there Jon Snow sits today: the anchormen's anchorman, a voice of cool judgment amid the cacophony. Why, in mid-career, does anyone write an autobiography? This isn't your last word, nor yet the drawing of a line between one phase of life and another. Snow will be there again on Channel 4 News this week, wearing another collection of peacock ties. The real point of this exercise, then, is to tell us more about himself and the skills he brings to his job. Mission accomplished. The bulk of Shooting History is just that - memories and reflections from one of television's most formidably active foreign correspondents. Ethiopia, El Salvador, the Afghanistan the Red Army won and lost? Been there, done that. Indeed, from Washington to Hong Kong to Kosovo, you can find precious few hot spots Snow hasn't covered. The middle reaches of this book are part history fluently recalled and part high-quality travelogue. That isn't, though, what gives it a special quality. What we learn, and need to know, is much more about Snow. A necessary introduction. The Channel 4 Snow, toiling away night after night over a full decade and a half now, is a remarkable operator. He's much more than a newsreader. He understands what's happening and thus what he's reading; he has clearly been part of the editing process; he provides intellectual underpinning on demand. Is that Alastair Campbell storming unbidden and unheralded into the studio? Snow will handle him. But, equally, he isn't a Paxman, launching combative interviews while keeping his own views suitably elliptical by BBC tradition. Snow is a classic liberal, never afraid to let us see where he's coming from. We know what he stands for and relate to it, but we also know that he's a professional who doesn't let his prejudices get in the way. There's the American parallel. The big networks use master presenters such as Rather and Peter Jennings to give the evening news continuity and context. Understanding and, to a certain extent, the reassurance of familiarity is their business. They're friends dropping in to seek our trust (and losing it disastrously on occasion). Jon Snow, too, invites trust from his 7 pm regulars. So the early years when dad (pre-bishopric) was headmaster of Ardingly in West Sussex, a Fifties world of woolly pullovers, crackling gramophones, petrol ration books and no TV - except for the coronation - are important sighting shots through a haze of pipe and wood smoke. The Snows had top-drawer connections without top-drawer means. Who's that old gent in his usual Sunday evensong pew? 'This is the Prime Minister, Jon', says dad. And SuperMac shakes a youthful hand. Politics - both religious and standard - was part of the mix. Donald Coggan and Trevor Huddleston came to stay. Big George Snow walked pretty tall in his chosen patch. When he wrote to the Times, they jumped to attention. In the Sixties, swinging into action at last, we used to talk about 'the establishment'. The Snows were establishment - and Jon, naturally enough, turned rebel. That was his Liverpool phase, enriched and radicalised by a VSO stint in Uganda. After the university, cheesed off by one demo too many, rusticated him, he answered Lord Longford's call and ran a centre for young drug addicts in Soho. Enter the Prince of Wales, seeking good causes. Enter a few first chances of broadcasting and a switch to radio reporting at LBC. Enter a job offer from ITN. And the point is that none of it seems cynical or febrile. Snow worked a long stint with his young drug addicts. He went back, a few years ago, to the Uganda school that he first taught in, and feels sorrow and pity for the devastation Aids has left behind. He is human being as well as TV being. He's grounded and experienced. The scrapes and scoops in countless wars aren't the heart of things here, and nor are occasional bouts of editorial commentary about post-Cold War orders. If we're to trust him as a guide, we need to trust him as a man. So he lays himself modestly (as well as perceptively and entertainingly) on the line - and he earns that trust.