The Hornet's Nest<br />by Jimmy Carter<br />Simon and Schuster £17.99, pp480 JImmy Carter is a great man who achieved greatness only after the carnival left town, a statesman revered for wisdom only when his power had drained away. The greatest living ex-President of the United States? There's not much competition, unless you like chewing gum with Gerald Ford or chewing the fat with Papa Bush. But Carter's industry, honesty and unflagging niceness make an unassailable case. Nothing has so become him as the rest of his life. Yet you can, alas, have too much of a good thing, maybe 480 or so pages too much. We know Carter the submarine officer, nuclear engineer, peanut farmer, governor, commander in chief, Nobel peacemaker and global democracy monitor well enough. We may even have read some of his previous 16 books: the memoirs, histories, poems and children's stories. But a novel... this novel? For the truth is that Carter has produced the worst of all offerings - an unreadable book, one which leaves other unreadables (like The Da Vinci Code) floundering in his lumpen wake. Is it the story he has to unfold, of how the War of Independence bubbled and boiled, for 20 years, through Georgia, Florida and the Carolinas? No; that's promising enough. Off go two sons of a Philadelphia shoemaker to seek their fortunes in frontier country. Henry gets killed early on, but Ethan and his Epsey, along with Kindred and his Mavis, ride the tides of war across the South. There's enough material here - pretty fresh if you don't know your Dixie - to mould into gripping adventure. It isn't the outline or ambition of the plot which makes The Hornet's Nest far less than the bee's knees, though; it's the pacing (slow-slow-slower-quick) and the telling. The author the dust jacket insists on calling President Carter is such a detail freak that every new character comes fully kitted in adjectival anoraks. So Elijah Clarke, for typical instance, 'had thick black hair cut about even with the lobes of his ears. His eyes were surprisingly large but squinted often as he talked. His aquiline nose and somewhat protruding chin have an impression of strength to a short upper lip and a soft-looking mouth. He had prominent yellowed teeth...' The surface descriptions run on and on. Worse, so do the little interpolated lectures which recall Jimmy's other brief career as a Sunday school teacher. Please, sir, what's the difference between a Whig and a Tory? And the whole class has to sit very quiet while he tells you, at length. Then there's the dialogue, the bits between inverted commas which all read the same whoever's talking. When Indian chiefs meet to discuss the state of their world, they say: 'There is little doubt that continuing warfare is against our best interests', rather as though they were Norwegian diplomats trying to resuscitate the Oslo accords. When a very young Indian reports political developments, he seems to be auditioning for a  Washington Post column. Apparently, 'John Stuart is not involved in this proposal and may even disapprove if questioned directly, but has been aware for many months of the Creeks who have co-operated with the Rangers. Increasingly, Governor Tonyn is making overall decisions as Stuart has become relatively inactive and somewhat isolated in Pensacola from the contested frontier areas...' Enough! It's not fair. Someone at S&amp;S should have saved Carter from himself, and curiosity corner. He doesn't deserve this perverse profile in courage. The great man has moral authority. He was better than Kerry or Clinton when he tackled Iraq at this year's Boston convention. He was valiant for truth when he gave the Venezuela election a clean bill of health. He's a continuing good deed in a bad world. He deserves our admiration. Maybe future historians will write interminable theses on this novel as artefact and store them in the Carter memorial library. Maybe his obsession with detail is part of a much deeper Carter condition. Maybe what one American critic calls his 'exalted ambivalencies' are also the curse of Kerry. But meanwhile, let's get back to the Middle East, Bosnia or Port-au-Prince. Something he and we can start and one day finish.