The Amber Room<br />by Catherine Scott-Clark and Adrian Levy<br />Atlantic Books £17.99, pp386 The best investigative journalism can be a long, mazy hunt after truth, sometimes winding down blind alleys, sometimes stalling in confusion - and often ending without any neat sensation of a conclusion. Catherine Scott-Clark and Adrian Levy are two of our most formidable investigative journalists. This is some of their finest work. But its fascination - no shame attached - lies more in the questing than the denouement. They set out to discover what happened to the Amber Room, the famous, inevitably priceless, gift Frederick I of Prussia once gave to Peter the Great. These intricate amber panels were a wonder of the artistic world. They hung in the Catherine Palace outside Leningrad for centuries until, in June, 1941, Hitler's Panzer Korps swept everything away. And there the mystery begins. Was the Amber Room destroyed, burnt to a cinder four years later as war once again engulfed its last known resting place, Knigsberg Castle in the Russian sliver of old East Prussia we now call Kalinagrad? That was what Alfred Rohde, the curator of the castle museum, testified. That was what Professor Alexander Brusov, a distinguished archaeologist dispatched by the Kremlin to establish the truth, reported. But nobody had any interest in believing them. Gerhard Strauss, the East German art historian sent to interrogate Rohde, swore the room had been saved and stowed in secret safety. Anatoly Kuchumov, curator of the Catherine Palace, agreed - and led an unavailing second Kremlin inquiry which lasted the rest of his lifetime. The KGB were on the case and so were the Stasi. The government in Bonn - like governments in Washington and all over Europe - sniffed ceaselessly after a trail. Who had   walked off with this amber fortune? It was in America, perhaps. Or West Germany, the illicit joy of some crazed billionaire collector. It was the Holy Grail of Nazi looted treasures, the inspirer of dozens of expeditions, investigations and newspaper articles, all of them blending feverish imagination with greed and glory. Can Scott-Clark and Levy crack the case at last? Perhaps. Maybe their solution - hugged close till the end - is the final word. Maybe we have Amber Room closure. Here, in the beginning, we wait (our sleuths, somewhat confusingly, have a penchant for the royal 'we') in St Petersburg, kicking our heels through six barren weeks until the doors of the Catherine Palace finally open and the granddaughter of Kuchumov, randomly encountered, sets us on our way. Here we are in the St Petersburg literature archive and ex-KGB HQ, trawling for Kuchumov's files; and then in Berlin at the Stasi records office, the Ministry of Departed Truth, squeezing blood from stone-faced women one file at a time. Here we go, knocking on doors across Europe, tracking relatives of the dead or decrepit second-hand witnesses who might just tell us something definitive. Meet George Stein, an oddball strawberry farmer and treasure hunter from near Hamburg who thought he'd got the US dirt on the Room and was (possibly) murdered before he could prove it. Meet Baron von Falz-Fein, 91, a White Russian who finances hunts for Nazi loot and was married to the daughter of Sir Noel Curtis-Bennet, Treasury official and Olympic committee president. You couldn't make up people like this. They are exotic and enigmatic and curiously gabby, pouring leads for our dynamic duo as liberally as they pour the vodka and white wine. Nothing they say can be taken at face value. They all have an angle. Scott-Clark and Avery find their clinching evidence in Kalinagrad and build a theory of much more than passing plausibility. That the room was lost when the Red Army took Knigsberg - but that in fact the amber miracle survived for a few days more until the victorious Red Army, billeted in the castle, carousing and looting as usual, destroyed it. The soldiers of the Soviet Union had robbed their own nation of one of its masterpieces. Why didn't curator Kuchumov, the Kremlin's own hunter-in-chief, conclude as much? Because he had his own guilty secret, because he knew that he could have saved the room from the Germans if he'd acted faster, because neither he - nor the politicians he answered to - could admit this terrible own goal. The only Amber Room left is the magnificent new reconstruction which now adorns the Catherine Palace. There is no original survivor, no end to this rainbow. The thesis has the randomness of truth to it. Do we all give up and go home? That won't happen either. This legend of the lost room probably needs more than clues and logic to kill it off now. This myth declines to die. And out there, on the Baltic horizon, you may already glimpse fresh posses of investigative reporters gathering.