Spin<br /> by Martin Sixsmith<br /> 336pp, Macmillan, £16.99   How do you sell a first novel called Spin by the ex-government press spokesman who fell foul of Stephen Byers and Jo Moore (before they fell foul of him)? You summon up all the usual black arts. Here, you say, is a "stiletto-sharp satire" which takes the lid off Whitehall. Here, only a few minutes into the future, is the cynical, heartlessly technocratic New Project Party sitting in power, with unctuous Andy Sheen as prime minister and a master manipulator called Charlie McDonald doing all the things Alastair Campbell may or may not have done. Here are tame hacks and dark secrets and drugs and nights of passion with sinuous special advisers. Here's Sixsmith's essay in ultimate revenge.  Sounds good? But spin it the other way, and the dish served up is as chill as cold potatoes. Sixsmith's plot, which begins with Downing Street taking an interest in a faraway local council matter, is absurd. His New Project constructions in a world where the Tories have gone down the plughole are irritatingly arch. If it's New Labour, why not say so?   He doesn't do sex well. Nor, maybe more surprisingly, is he much good at the corridors of power stuff. "If you think of  Yes, Minister," goes one of his little lectures, "then the PermSec is basically Sir Humphrey" - permanent because the minister can't remove him, "which is what makes the civil service independent and able to offer impartial, objective advice".   By these alternative lights, Spin is a lumpy, contrived exercise which shouldn't lose Byers - let alone Blair - a moment's sleep. Rather, you wonder how anyone so politically out of touch (Ken Clarke and the New Libs marching to power?) was ever sat down in a senior ministry and asked to direct its communications.   But in any spinning diversion, there is always the unspun version, a reality floating below the puffs. Would  Spin have found a publisher if it had arrived out of the blue, without history attached? Perhaps, at least at the margins. Spin bowls along merrily for the most part, with one or two decent jokes and a nice self-parodying touch of the Cartlands. "'Oh Sonya,' he whispered tenderly, 'I feel a force swelling inside me, a great power of nature that must see the day.'"   One halfway serious question lingers - what is this thing called Spin? Sir Humphrey knew all about it, twisting Jim Hacker round his little finger. Alastair was doing it most mornings in his tabloid days long before he ever saw Whitehall (and the Mail has taken it to new heights since). Peter Mandelson didn't invent it, nor did Tony Blair push it to giddy limits. We're talking, at heart, not about some malign force corroding politics, but about the way things are and always were. We're talking persuasion and explanation, one inescapable part of politicking. Sixsmith, rather too full of portent and probity, sets out to slay a dragon and winds up singeing his own raised eyebrows. When it was all over, he wrote a novel - while Jo Moore stole away and trained to be a teacher.