The Year That Shook the World<br />by Mark Kurlansky<br />Jonathan Cape £17.99, pp437 Mark Kurlansky, biographer of cod and historian of salt, is a very superior journalist: diligent in his research, quirkily original in his insights, swift and clear in his storytelling. He goes where others don't think of treading and tries to illumine obscure corners of human experience. But 1968 - the year of the Paris riots, the Tet offensive, the Prague spring and the murders of Bobby Kennedy and Martin Luther King - is more than a fillet of bacalao .  'What was unique about 1968 was that people were rebelling over disparate issues and had in common only that desire to rebel, ideas about how to do it, a sense of alienation from the established order and a profound distaste for authoritarianism.' But it was not planned, Kurlansky adds, and it was not organised.   The Yippies who wrecked Chicago knew little of the students who tried to free Warsaw. While Germany seethed, Canada smiled and walked on by. France had Danny Cohn-Bendit and amazing  vnements, Britain had Tariq Ali and little else.   So how do you make all that a time-framed whole? You can't. Huge upheavals, such as China's cultural revolution, are dismissed in a page, as top-down not bottom-up. Yet there is the core of a thesis here, and it does resonate. 1968, Kurlansky reports, was the year that Walter Cronkite realised how 'television was playing an important part not only   in the reporting of events, but in the shaping of them. Increasingly, around the world, public demonstrations were being staged... for television'. You didn't need a lot of people. Only enough to fill the frame of a TV camera. Maybe Martin Luther King and his media-savvy brothers had got the message first, but see how the demonstrations in the South of 1963 had become common events on American campuses by 1968.   Mix fear of the Cold War, revulsion against old men in power and the stultified society that sustained them, profound antipathy to the Vietnamese conflict, and you had a cocktail of grievances   ready mixed. 'We met through television, seeing pictures of each other on television', said Cohn-Bendit. 'We did not have relationships with each other, but we had a relationship with what our imagination produced from seeing pictures of each other.'   Lights, cameras, action... But was that all it amounted to? Some young people catching a mood, some copycat cavorting and clowning, some paving stones hurled at an established order too stupid to turn the other cheek? You can certainly argue as much. King was already seeing his influence slipping when he died. Bobby Kennedy would never have    won that presidential nomination. Chicago and the sacking of the Democratic convention begat Nixon and Agnew (and, 34 years on, a classman of '68 called George Walker Bush). After De Gaulle came Pompidou and Chirac. After Dubcek, the unlikely, even unwitting revolutionary swept along by   events, came two more decades of Czech repression. At least, and at best, Tariq Ali can't be blamed for inventing Margaret Thatcher.   The trouble with TV is its restless inconsequentiality. What's hot today will be tepid tomorrow. No single image - not even the crumbling twin towers - lives long in a multi-channelled world of cable and satellite. And, looking around at a vista of electoral apathy and ideological boredom, you could be forgiven for shrugging and moving on, leaving the retirement home for ageing revolutionaries behind. Don't say Yippie, say grandpappy. The answer, my friends, has blown away on   the wind. By the close of 1968, Kurlansky concludes, people 'felt weary, angry and longing for a news story that was not abysmally negative'. So, in December 1968 Apollo 8 transmitted pictures of Earth from a lunar orbit and we could, the Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins later said, see 'an Earth as it appears: blue and white, not capitalist or Communist; blue and white, not rich or poor; blue and white, not envious or envied'. It is a pleasant final conceit, a feelgood factor Hollywood would love. But it is also the point where journalism - collecting, cross-referencing, recording - runs out of gas.   Kurlansky has set himself    a huge task and fallen gallantly short of fulfilling it. A notebook and chats with Cronkite will only get you so far. To go further, you need an original thesis, not second-hand digestions. His  1968 is a riveting, evocative, entertaining read. But you need a companion volume; and the perfect one sits close on this spring's book shelf.   Jonathan Schell's  The Unconquerable World (Penguin), believing with passion that minds and peaceful protest matter much more than war, ranges far beyond 1968. But it answers many of the questions Kurlansky poses. What did the Prague spring accomplish? Schell quotes Hannah Arendt - 'to substitute violence for power can bring victory, but the price is very high; for it is not only paid by the vanquished, it is paid by the victor in terms of his own power' - and adds his own damning codicil: 'Even as this use of violence restored rule it destroyed the last reserves of support the regime required.'   Schell and Kurlansky agree here. But because Schell isn't restrained to 12 calendar months he can glimpse a greater horizon. This is an age of single-issue politics - the environment, globalisation, the Iraq war - pursued with a fury on the streets that makes politicians quail. The apathy of the ballot box isn't echoed on the pavements.   Maybe some generations have yawned and turned over in bed: but others - when Gandhi or Mandela called - have rocked the world their own way. 1968, in sum, wasn't a beginning; and it is absolutely not the end.