Just Law<br/>by Helena Kennedy<br/>Chatto &amp; Windus £20, pp356 Comes the hour, comes the book. Just as the Lord Chief Justice himself clambers on to the ramparts of liberty, belabouring a government selling our freedoms perilously short, so Helena Kennedy provides the book of the entire issue. Not just law, to be just knocked around by any old Home Secretary, but law that is just, a bedrock of our democracy. Her claims to prescience are incontestable. She saw the way Messrs Blair and Blunkett were heading before she took up her pen. She knew her Charlie Falconer. Her burden of proof is overwhelming. Publication arrives, with eerie relevance, at the moment the Home Secretary floats his idea for changing the key to conviction from 'beyond reasonable doubt' to 'on the balance of probabilities'. That is from the traditional criminal test to the civil court norm. Absolutely no coincidence. On the contrary, it is one more pending death of liberties foretold, with Lord Woolf joining in the chorus. Who, you may ask, are the driving forces behind this slither into autocracy? They are politicians and, still worse, politician-lawyers. The Lord Chancellor, Lord Falconer, is a commercial lawyer, a very rich commercial lawyer, as is the Attorney-General, Lord Goldsmith, and the former Lord Chancellor, Lord Irvine. All three were in the million-pounds-a-year bracket before the call of government came. And yet such grandiose guys constantly inveigh against criminal defence lawyers, kow-tow to aggrieved policemen seeking quick convictions and hack away at legal aid. 'These men,' writes an icy Baroness Kennedy, 'may not have had the privilege of knowing the lawyers I have known, both solicitors and barristers, who chose law not for the money, but because they believed they could make a difference in people's lives.' Many of them work tirelessly with 'the frightened, hopeless and downtrodden'. They are the essential foot soldiers of justice. They earn less than one-twentieth of Charlie in his pomp. 'And I am tired of hearing them traduced.' The distinction within the law between civil bloat and relative criminal poverty has seldom been more acidly made. See the Lord Chancellor shelling out £4 million a year to a familiar tribe of eagles and consultants for advice on the Courts Service. See how 'the outrageous fees of commercial lawyers have had a corrosive effect on the profession as a whole and played a shameful role in driving up fees across the board'. So, when Ministers tell you they're 'after the fat cats, do not believe them. They like fat cats.They have a much more frightening beast in their sights'. There are two reasons for stressing this particular theme of Kennedy's. One, because as a vibrant criminal QC, she sees the rift, nay, canyon, more clearly than most. And, second, for the part it plays in her progressive disillusion with the politics she once espoused: the cause of New Labour. Here's the real fascination of her book, which is almost autobiography disguised as polemic. She wanted to believe that another eloquent lawyer, Tony Blair, offered something better. She joined the Lords and headed the British Council for him. Now, suddenly, she is One of Us turned One of Them. What happened? The fascination here is not that Helena Kennedy was some Old Labour hand trapped out in fresh ideological kit. No, she's not really a politician at all, weakest when playing Andrew Rawnsley, strongest when her experience of the law and her passion for join forces. She's devastating on terrorism, on the 'contagion' of special powers 'which seeps into the bloodstream' of the system. She's scathing about the horror of Northern Ireland, 'when a neglectful, cynical political class turned its back on what was happening'. She is properly scornful about the value of tainted, secondhand MI5 and MI6 intelligence, with a lovely quote from Geoffrey Howe to the Scott inquiry. Secret reports? 'When we check them, they aren't even straws in the wind - they are cornflakes in the wind.' Fighting terrorism doesn't involve taking the line of least resistance, locking away without trial or choosing special 'trusty' judges to do the politicians' work. Nor does it involve standards of evidence which couldn't jog up and down the Strand on their own. The Attorney-General should be required to publish his legal opinion on the Iraq war 'because, if it was based on the dossier of intelligence constructed for public consumption, then he, too, constructed a legal argument on a false prospectus'. You'll see how utterly contemporaneous Just Law is, poured out in a flood of forensic fury. Internment without trial for non-citizens: pre-emptive incarceration of the mentally ill: attacks on judges and defence lawyers: double jeopardy retrials: record numbers in prison and a move to scrap jury trials. And that's only for starters. The Blair Government has done many decent things, but somehow its defences are down when police, spooks and the Home Office get together; somehow, it loses the freedom plot. How, the baroness wonders, can that possibly be? Because of a lurking Labour authoritarianism, because of feebleness in George Bush's wake, but, most of all, because there are votes in such toughness and tabloids to appease. It is a seething indictment, written in a rush and showing it from time to time, occasionally trying to squash too many themes - race, sexism, white male judges - into too tight a box. But it's full of brilliant examples from the Kennedy casebook. It takes the nodding apathy of Joe Public on the chin, then stands and delivers. 'What distinguishes the state from the subversive in a liberal democracy lies in the existence in the former of an independent rule of law, to which the authorities are always subject.' There now... can passion and the pain of faith betrayed get Joe off his backside? How many Guantanamos make a scandal? Must Labour's moral core seek its own asylum? Will judges, corralled on a Supreme Court, lose their tongue and their influence? If Helena Kennedy can't stir a reaction, then nobody can, and we, the residual jury, deserve everything we get.