Ancient Mariner Ken McGoogan Bantam, £16.99, pp356   Brisk, readable books about great Englishmen doing great things - let us call it the School of  Longitude - don't come much better than this. Samuel Hearne was a hero amazing enough to make the top 10 on any BBC list. Born 1745; grew up in Beaminster, Dorset; and went to sea as a midshipman with Samuel Hood in 1757; travelled to Canada as a Hudson Bay Company sailor when he was 18; walked for three years and 2,175 miles through icy wildernesses (where white man had never trod before) in vain search of the Northwest Passage.  Enough wonders? Hearne founded and built the company's first inland trading post and was governor of Prince of Wales Fort on the bay until, faced by overwhelming odds, he surrendered to the French and brilliantly bartered freedom for his men. He was an almost self-taught naturalist and anthropologist. His meticulous notes created a foundation for all who followed the paths he mapped. His posthumous autobiography,  A Journey to the Northern Ocean, is the earliest classic of travel, observation and adventure. He told a ripping yarn.   And Ken McGoogan, for the most part, does likewise in  Ancient Mariner. In one sense, he only needs to flesh out Hearne's lean prose. Simple facts can do the rest. But the skill here lies in the detail that reveals this curious, questing soul. We're in Hearne's first few winters on Hudson Bay, and 'he began learning Cree, regarded by many as the root Algonquian language'.   Then, come summer, he starts sailing with two Inuit boys and masters the rudiments of their language, Inuktitut. 'To these he would later add several dialects of Athapascan, as spoken by various Dene groups.' Seldom has such toil proved so fruitful.    When Hearne goes on his epic trek to find the passage and the untold mineral wealth which supposedly lay near the mouth of the Coppermine River, he takes a few company hacks with him. But they're no good; nor are the fork-tongued Indian guides he hires. He needs the fabled chief of the Chipewyan, Matonabbee, who arrives with a single prescription: bring women along. 'Women were made for labour,' the chief said. 'One woman could carry or haul as much as any two men.' They required little food. They pitched tents, dressed skins and mended clothing. 'There is no such thing as travelling any distance in this country without their assistance.'    Matonabbee had seven wives, collecting them rather like stamps. When you fancied somebody else's squaw, you wrestled him for her. He was a good wrestler. He was also clever and fluent in languages, including English, both civilised and utterly ferocious. Find some Inuit camping peacefully by the riverbank and he has to attack, to dismember the men, women and children.   Hearne's dilemma: does he dance on with these wolves or return to base, defeated? He shuts his eyes and tries to forget the massacre at the place he names 'Bloody Falls'. After all, he's on company business.   The story of Samuel Hearne has something for everyone: love - for the governor's beautiful, half-Indian daughter - and derring-do and science in the raw. But it is the glimpse into the lost world of the Chipewyan, Dene, Inuit and Swampy Cree that catches and holds the imagination 250 years later. These men of the North were blighted by the sicknesses the Europeans brought with them, especially smallpox. They made the Hudson Bay Company rich. Their reward, all too often, was starvation and other forms of death. More children of empire, swept away with the detritus of civilisation.   Once Ken McGoogan has an opening chapter full of florid pseudo-reconstruction off his chest, he settles for calmer narrative, framing his hypotheses with care, keeping himself in the background until Hearne, grief-stricken over the death of his wife and the suicide of Matonabbee, quits Canada forever and retires to the coffee houses and salons of London where he meets Coleridge and (tentatively) becomes the very model of the Ancient Mariner.   It's a slightly frail peg to hang a book title on, and not very necessary. Maybe Hearne, even in the Beaminster that McGoogan travels to, is a forgotten man. But tell us, one more time, what he did, and the legend lives.