The Rise of the Indian Rope Trick: A Biography of a Legend <br />Peter Lamont <br />288pp, Little, Brown, £14.99 The truth here is more bizarre than even the most outlandish fiction. There never was an Indian rope trick - the one where a "juggler" tosses a length of rope into the air, sees it suddenly stiffen and watches a small monkey of a boy climb it until, with a click of the fingers, he vanishes. The story was old rope from beginning to end, and nothing to do with India.  On the contrary, it was the impurest invention of John Elbert Wilkie, a reporter for the Chicago Tribune, penning an 1890 cod piece as Fred S Ellmore. (S Ellmore ... copies than the Chicago Times, eh. Geddit?) Nor do the wonders and resonances quite stop there. Lord Conrad Black of Hollinger currently leads the Chicago Sun-Times in its ancestral battle with the Trib. More old rope; more amazing tales. And Wilkie himself - when City editor of the Tribune a few years later - got a call from the Secretary of the Treasury. "I should like you to come to Washington and make you chief of the Secret Service." He went, put his propaganda skills learned as a journalist to brilliant use, and "exploited the press far more than his predecessors had ever done, controlling their access to information and ensuring his agents' activities were hailed as a public victory". The first spin doctor.   Today, no doubt, he'd have been busy shuttling between Baghdad and the Hutton inquiry. So, the basic story was tabloid tosh, as in "Freddy Starr ate my hamster". Wilkie himself admitted as much in print four months on. Yet the world chose not to notice his straightforward correction and apology. It was too busy playing hunt the fakir and inventing a legend.   Most of Peter Lamont's divertingly diligent research is devoted to explaining why on earth this should be so. The Indian magicians he found when he went there a few years ago dealt in silk hankies and silver tubes and magic wands, the familiar tat of western trade, about as mysterious as a takeaway chicken masala. Yet 19th-century Britain, high on the majesty of empire, swallowed super-swami stuff open mouthed. Wasn't it Marco Polo who first reported wonders in the east? Didn't the Moghul emperor Jahangir keep amazing conjurers at his court? Just like the Beatles 70 years on, Joe Public wanted to believe.   And one credulous thing, inevitably, went with another. There was a great Victorian market for "Oriental" wizards who came from Essex and "French" masters of magic who came from England and worked in Scotland. You could never be an ordinary lad from round the corner if you wanted to amaze - and the farther away you and your feats seemed to come from, the better. Then there were travellers - mostly retired colonels with notebooks - touring the Raj in search of tales and little about hard evidence; not to mention the big-time illusionists, the Blackstones and Goldins back home, who'd hang a sensation on any passing peg for the benefit of box office takings and headlines alike. Mix together, stew lightly through the decades, spice up at every opportunity and you had an exotic dish with a life of its own and an alleged history reaching into the mists of time.   All bunk, all rubbish. We talk sometimes about a purer, kinder world BC (Before Campbell). More bunk. The rope trick, from start to finish, was a textbook study in cynicism, cupidity and calculated confusion. Did that matter? Of course not. Nobody got hurt; most people, puffed with self-delusion, were thoroughly entertained.   Yet add just a pinch of caution. Are we 21st-century types too modern, too sophisticated to be taken in now? Read about the fakir at the court of Ranjit Singh buried alive for a month without food, water or air and think of David Blaine. Human nature doesn't change, nor human credulity, eternally available for exploitation.   Full marks for entertainment to Dr Lamont, somewhat mysteriously billed in these straitened times as "research fellow in the history, theory and performance of magic at the University of Edinburgh". With nothing up his sleeve but a top-up fee?