The Murdoch Archipelago<br />by Bruce Page<br />Simon &amp; Schuster £20, pp480 Will the real Rupert Murdoch please stand up? No, not the charming, visionary, dynamic Mr M (as portrayed in William Shawcross's ultra-benign biography). Nor the shadowy, scabrous, BBC-destroying Rupert (as here conjured from the vast depths by Bruce Page). Can we please have a Rupert who commands loyalty as well as fear, admiration as well as loathing? Let's call him Murdoch at 72, Murdoch on his third marriage and second family, Murdoch 2003 with a prostate condition and a sperm bank, Murdoch of The Simpsons. 'He's not the Rupert we used to know,' says his cut-price guru, Irwin Stelzer. So who, pray, is he? Page isn't a great help on some of these questions. He's interesting when digging up Australian roots and - as befits a former opening bat for the Insight team - pretty good on financial chicanery. But the main feat of this mix of memoir, media philosophising and panegyric to the great days of the Sunday Times is to put Murdoch back where he doesn't always care to be: the 'gorilla' of Greg Dyke's imaginings, performing centre stage. How does the old boy keep getting away with it? Page can't quite understand. Rupert wasn't much of a journalist, more a second-rate subeditor. (Bruce doesn't think much of subs, though on this evidence he needs them dearly.) His Murdoch comes ideology lite and intellect denuded. He's a baleful blight on honest reporting and - worse than Harmsworth or Beaverbrook - a relentless featherer of his own corporate nest. Politicians fawn on him and fear him - unless he fears them, in which case he does the fawning. He accretes and manipulates for a fast, furious living. The facile answer is that he's too big now to fall on his face. News Corp is an amorphous mystery, a foreign company in the US, the Fox voice of America elsewhere. The boss can destroy those who get in his way. His tabloids win elections, his broadsheets grease the slipways of power. Murdoch the Untouchable lives for ever. But he won't, of course. And then Lachlan and the rest will have to do what Daddy did at the start: live on their nerves and their wits. Time and again here, Rupert stakes the pot - on the News of the World, the  Sun, the Times, Wapping, Sky and Fox - and time and again he wins. Dirty work behind the arras with Thatcher and Reagan? Sure. But most of the time his eye for the main chance and his nerve matter more. You may hate him if you wish; you underestimate him - as Page tends to do - at your peril. Take political beliefs. 'Freedom for him was one shaft, and he was its spearhead; the causes of totalitarianism destroyed, of unregulated, largely tabloid television, of union-free workplaces and innovative finance were not divisible.' Add a bit of 'Western chest-drumming' and scorn for establishment dodos, call the stew 'libertarianism' - and scoff away to your heart's content. This is crude and callow, the natural philosophy of the man who invented the tabloid Sun and staffed it with 'drunks and wannabes'. Bruce sniffs a lot like this. But where are the romantic gestures? The doomed attempt, for instance, to rescue Today. Are the loss-making Times and New York Post merely political calling cards, 'pseudo papers' to set beside Harry Evans's Sunday Times? Why on earth bore your readers stupid banging on about the evils of Euro-federalism when the corrupt heart of Brussels can be subverted more efficiently by a few favours and phone calls? Why hang onto a jaded variant of the special relationship which makes no sense to globalised News Corp? This new Mark Two Murdoch has form as well as ambition. To be sure, 'he doesn't like backing losers', as Woodrow Wyatt once complained. He ditched Major (just as, one day, he will ditch the loser Blair). He'll intervene to hose down his papers if they turn over the wrong stones. But there's a legacy to protect now, a philosophy which stretches beyond cynicism. In this new world, other giant corporations can be just as cuddly with government as News Corp, Richard Desmond is almost as welcome at Number 10 as Murdoch and celeb mags from Emap make the Sun look tame. Anyone can play. But the true question is whether they can play like Rupert - for he was, and still is, the difference.