Living History<br />by Hillary Rodham Clinton<br />Headline £20, pp528 The instant frothings, of course, have been all about Monica, Bill, and Hillary's terrible fury: her 'gulping, crying and yelling', her 'devastation and shock' over this 'stinging betrayal'. He weeps, she weeps - and their old right-wing foes carry on sniping as usual. What a cold, calculating Lady Macbeth she still is (apparently). What a ruthless operator, glossing her ambitious way back to the White House. But the whole truth - based on the whole book - is rather more interesting than that. For a new, unexpected Hillary Clinton emerges from these 528 pages. Vapid, as in 'Jackie [Kennedy] greeted me at the elevator door... wearing silk pants in one of her signature colours - a combination of beige and gray - and a matching blouse with subtle peach stripes'. Galumphingly obvious, as in 'While we never agreed about abortion and birth control, Mother Teresa and I found much common ground in many other areas including the importance of adoption'. Goggle-eyed, as in 'I became President of the local fan club for Fabian, a teen idol, which consisted of me and two other girls' - or indeed, 45 years later, as in 'I lined up Sir Elton John and Stevie Wonder to perform together [for Tony and Cherie], a truly great Anglo-American musical alliance'. Prince Charles 'is delightful, with a quick wit and self-deprecating humour'. Prince Philip is 'a polished conversationalist... who talked about sailing and the history of Britannia'. Princess Di was 'uncommonly beautiful... radiating life and a sense of vulnerability that I found heartbreaking'. And the Queen 'reminded me of my own mother in appearance... Holding a demanding, high-profile role for decades through difficult and fast-changing times was hard to me to imagine in the light of my more limited experience'. Meet Hillary Rodham Simpleton, a gawping traveller, a mistress of the obvious, a fully-paid up member of the 'Western Hemisphere First Ladies' Club' (and, indeed, of its Middle East branch, too, if Queen Noor of Jordan is turning up). Is this the brain that launched a thousand scams? Forget it. Here comes Boris Yeltsin, sending her up something rotten. 'This is it, Hillary, your special treat!,' said Boris, grinning as he sniffed the pungent steam, 'Mmm! Delicious!'. 'What is it?' I asked as I picked up my spoon. He paused dramatically: 'Moose lips.' Exit pursued by lipless moose. The junior Senator for New York is (allegedly) one of the brightest women of the age, perhaps the force to follow George W in 2008. So what's she doing here? Trying to out-dumb the President for a surprise 2004 strike? Putting the income into nincompoop?  Living History is such a grisly grind of an $8 million publisher's advance that you'd suppose nobody as smart as Mrs C could possibly have turned it loose in this state unless she really didn't realise how awful it was. Not even her domestic economy, stupid, accounts for that. You're left searching for other explanations. One, naturally, is that this is the cynical ploy to end all cynical ploys: an autobiography designed to portray Mrs C as such a fluffy airhead that the charges against her dissolve in incredulity. The dark force of Whitewater? If you believe that about this devoted mum, always worrying about Chelsea and her next hair-do, you'll believe anything. Her anger over those   who plot against her and Bill, her stupefaction when he confesses, suddenly become comprehensible. Hi honey, I'm home! And Hilly's in the kitchen, baking apple pie. Don't let her out too often because she always 'mis-steps' (more Mrs Malaprop than Mrs Macbeth). A good - but frankly incredible - theory. Why produce a book this thick to try to prove you're just a little woman, when you're not? Maybe the answer is more mundane. Maybe Hillary is one of those very clever people who can talk and think, but can't quite put it on paper. Most former prime ministers - from Wilson to Thatcher - wrote dismal memoirs. Why should former First Ladies be any different (especially when they still have fish frying on another stove)? She only comes to life when she quotes her own one-liners. She's good at dialogue and lousy at narrative. So, for passable truth and human sense, try mixing and matching. This composite Mrs Clinton is surprisingly pretty and cares about how she looks. (Not one of the pictures selected argues otherwise). She fell in love with Bill, and he with her, at Yale: Chicago girl and Arkansas boy. She gave up a glowing legal future for him, instinctively, unhesitatingly. She relished the boondocks, without realising how that got up the noses of the great and good. She's into family life, like her mum and dad. She has a genuine bond with Chelsea (who seems a daughter to be proud of). Is she - the Derry Irvine memorial question - a natural politician? No way, no more than Derry is. She's a wooden, earnest speaker, without any of Bill's charisma or jokes. She needs the glow of his reflection. She is a manufactured product, built on hard work, much social concern and a lifetime of women's issues. Wound her or her family, and she'll get good and mad - and good and even (Ken Starr). Would she be sitting in New York planning her next race if she hadn't married a hairy, flawed, supremely talented college boy from a broken home? Of course not. But does any of this make her the wicked witch of the Ozarks her enemies claim? The Clintons who struggle into the light are more ordinary and extraordinary than that. They're not zealots. They have a capacity to make and keep friends. They're genuinely surprised when Big Medicine's sharks come to bite them. She hadn't realised what a cruel resting place the White House could be. She had to learn to hate, but she's a quick learner. Is that enough for $8m? Some publishers' mothers do have 'em (with $12m of Bill's stuff piled up behind). But if you want to understand the couple who divided America, and may yet be its future, then there is, indeed, a little living history here between these lines.