Spain's Road to Empire<br />by Henry Kamen<br />Allen Lane, Penguin Press $25, pp640 There is an inevitable  Stars Wars  touch to modern perceptions of empire building. Power games. We strike and other empires strike back. We rule and others cower. (George W Bush probably goes to the movies). So, once upon a time, Britain sprayed pink territories across the globe. Now - from hero to zero - we are left with the Falklands, Gibraltar and Bermuda and a sense of loss and resentment follows in train. Yet, in reality, was the British empire ever remotely like that? What, indeed, do we mean by the word 'empire'? Henry Kamen - brilliant and prolific from his Barcelona base - sets out to answer this crucial question for the time (roughly 1500-1800) and country (Spain) he knows as intimately as any living historian. The Spanish empire came first, remember, while Britain was still ruminating and feuding. So what? We sank the Armada soon enough and chased them out of North America. Our empire knocked theirs into a cocked hat, didn't it? A simple-minded, chauvinist assumption. In reality, the empire the Castilians built was much more akin to some loosely knit multinational. Say a hotel chain - Best Western, Hilton - where local entrepreneurs buy a franchise and do their own thing within distantly imposed guidelines. This hegemony was built by Flemish princes and Genoese explorers, by Portuguese sea captains and Chinese traders, by Africans, Belgians, Italians, Basques, Dutch. To call it a 'Spanish' empire is to praise the front men over-zealously and connive at a self-deception. Spain began as an isolated, impoverished land, cut off from the tides of change which flowed through Europe: and, at the close, it returned to the solitariness and poverty of Franco. There was never much outright power in between. After the Armada, Madrid had to make do with a feeble fleet (one far inferior to anything at Paris or London's command) that made extreme colonial devolution a hapless necessity. In Europe, dynasties married, made alliances, dissolved them. Beyond it, the conquistadors came and rolled over distant local administrations (even empires, in another stretched form of the term), lending lustre to the centre. But the the makers of empire were always the resilient few - almost con artists, seeming to command forces which never quite appeared over the horizon. Kamen tellingly contrasts the tiny bands of adventurers and the far greater, but far more naive forces ranged against them. Their power was the power of example, and of decision. Once the initial conflicts were over, they ruled by complex forms of consent. After the final secession of Portugal in 1668, much of that conquistador spirit - never as widespread as legend would have it - faded away. (Castilians, en masse, were reluctant travellers and lousy linguists, always keener on navel examination than naval derring-do). Once the Treaty of Utrecht was signed in 1713, Spain settled for imposed boundaries and an inert, grumpy conservatism. Gradually the myths rolled back. Who cared about the Gulf of Maracaibo when Minorca had been ceded to the British? The great days of Spanish empire lasted under a hundred years. Yet they were great - and they had continuing resonance from Guam to Sicily to California. What the Spaniards brought, in their cut-price, almost diffident way, was knowledge and technological: know-how. What they offered was partnership. They were modest, anxious administrators, always short of cash and not always over-endowed with ambition. But their weakness was also a strength. The partners did not fear them. They understood how much they, in turn, were needed. They had equal shares in this rickety, consensual enterprise. They recognised that Spain's power was neither more nor less than the sum of the capacities of its collaborators. Is that how today's Spain remembers its past? Naturally not. Empires wax mightier in the memory and one Pizarro is worth 100 forgotten financiers. Gibraltar festers on because it is a continuing, taunting symbol of failure. ('Never since the medieval Arab invasions had the Spaniards ceded a fortress on their own territory to a foreign power,' Kamen writes). Ceuta and Melilla are cherished, against all common sense, because they evoke an allegedly gallant history. The stirrings of the Basques and Catalans are not some sudden effusion. Their roots are buried here, too. Kamen is lucid, scholarly and perceptive. There may be little that is factually new along this road, but his interpretation - tunes of glory firmly muffled - is a revelation. He explains what is seldom realised and always swiftly forgotten: that order and ingenuity and calm were as vital to the construction and maintenance of empire as force of arms. The wisdom of the many built on and then out-distanced the bravery of the few. And there is one other resonance. Why, within the European Union, are Britain and Spain - supposedly ancient enemies - in fact the warmest, most co-operative of friends? Political commentators put it down to a personal warmth between Blair and Aznar, but you cannot escape other parallels as you turn these pages. Why did the princes of India embrace the Raj so easily? Why do we still look longingly at Africa while Madrid scans South America? Why are our two languages the dominant tongues of Western advance? Britain and Spain were often enemies. Their empire ended in ignominy, bitterness and autocracy. Ours died away in a slightly self-righteous haze of magnanimity. But, perhaps, a century or half a century on, there is no real end of empire for either of us. The legend that Kamen constructs and then deconstructs has a potency which leaves fact - and honesty - trailing. Best friends, despite ourselves: bound together by fond illusion and defeat.