Editor<br />by Max Hastings<br />Macmillan £20, pp608 Newspaper editors, writes Max Hastings - with characteristic self-deprecation - 'are swiftly and justly forgotten'. You are only 'as good as your last edition' - and in the case of Hastings's  Telegraph that was seven long years ago: a distant, almost pre-historic time before John Major left Edwina out of his memoirs and Ulrika began stroking a Gladiator's knee. Who, so many fish and chip wrappings later, really cares? We may identify three categories of carers. Those involved and mentioned (or almost mentioned) here: those, diligent seekers after truth (or Telegraph readers) who wish to further their understanding of newspapers: and those (here comes Major again) who fume and fret about confidences betrayed, for there be monstrous betrayals here. Max serves us well on all three counts. The fledgling editor of 1986 is pretty Gwyneth-gets-an-Oscar about the professionals who helped him survive. But he can also do waspish, going on gorgeously malevolent: especially about the scions of the new Right who got up his nose. Simon Heffer's talents 'would have yielded him greater rewards had he been willing to test prejudice, an armoury of implacably held opinions, against some contact with the humbler realities of human affairs'. William Rees-Mogg's somersaults are legendary - 'no wonder readers do not take the utterances of pundits very seriously, no matter how Olympian their tone'. As for Paul Johnson, 'I could never bring myself either to hate Paul or fear him. For all his literary gifts, absolute lack of judgment rendered him finally ridiculous'. Hastings may play the hunting/ shooting/ fishing Tory wet to perfection, but there is nothing damp about his pen. That goes, with added fervour, for the chapters on Princess Diana and the last Conservative Prime Minister, co-joined in loneliness and bitterness. Di curls up on a sofa and gives Max the huge, earnest, sympathetic, lash-twitching, knee-trembling eye. 'Always... a brilliant performer, appealing shamelessly to the audience's sense of her vulnerability, deploying the semblance of frankness as a weapon'. Major rants and stomps over the petty things. Despite his 'intelligence, politeness, charm, decency, there came a moment in every conversation at which the mask of high office slipped, to reveal the angry little bank manager underneath'. Hastings is a brilliant reporter (and reconstructor of dialogue); and the access an editor gets - the seat in the front stalls - gives him an extra edge. Any historian of the Major or Di years will need to stir him, as spice, into their Morton and Currie pots. But where does reporting stop and conviction begin? That is the murmured criticism of those he left in Torygraph Towers. Poor Max... clever chap, but never one of us... Doesn't have any views of his own you see, and if you don't believe, then you can't understand. It is a view worth pausing over. The paper that Lord Hartwell's naivety passed to Conrad Black was once (in Norman Lamont's phrase) the Conservative  Pravda. You had to read it, because those pages led straight to debates at the natural heart of government. Conrad - a shrewd, entertaining, Canadian zealot - could not keep that access going: maybe the party was too exhausted to keep it going, either. But Hastings's professionalism, his concentration on modernising a creaking, failing paper, also meant that the  Pravda connection went begging. Max (like compatriots on papers like the  Guardian ) sat with Douglas Hurd or Ken Clarke, brooding on the day's lessons. The wilder shores of Thatcherism or Euroscepticism were always lost in a blue mist of incomprehension. And now, perhaps, there is nothing left worth the comprehending. Who wants to rattle on about IDS when there are golden years to remember?