Interesting Times<br />by Eric Hobsbawm<br /> Allen Lane £25, pp464 Autobiography does not come much more sumptuous than this. Eric Hobsbawm writes with elegant, witty precision. His memory - not just for people and dates, but looks and sounds and the feel of things - is prodigious; it would be a wonder at 45, never mind 85. The past he remembers lives again in these pages. He was a child in Vienna after Hitler gave up house-painting and a schoolboy in Berlin as the Weimar Republic failed, a fledgling historian with a seat in the stalls. And those who relish his pungent histories will not be disappointed. Hobsbawm's gift for provocative generalisation remains undimmed. The surprise, though, is in the poignancy. Hobsbawm has not set out to write a conventional autobiography. This, he says sternly, is a public life, not a private one. His last half century is rendered in fragments, essays on variegated themes. His second wife, Marlene, and children are shadowy characters set to one side of this stage. Yet the bizarre, blighted family who raised him in Vienna - his pathetically eager-beaver dad, his young and doomed mother - are remembered with sorrow and pity and love. We do not - like Hobsbawm - really know why Nelly Grun, the 18-year-old daughter of a Viennese jeweller, fell for Percy Hobsbaum (sic), the much older fourth child of a Jewish cabinet maker, in Alexandria in 1913; nor why Percy's brother Sidney fell for Nelly's sister Gretl. We do know they were indigent fish out of water. Percy had been a boxer. He might have found work as a shipping clerk in Egypt - but Vienna had nothing to offer. 'In the late evening of Friday 8 February 1929 my father returned from another of his increasingly desperate visits to town in search of money to earn or borrow, and collapsed outside the front door of our house. My mother heard his groans through the upstairs windows and, when she opened them on the freezing air of that spectacularly hard alpine winter, she heard him calling to her. Within a few minutes he was dead... In dying, he also condemned to death my mother... "Something has broken inside me," she wrote to her sister... Within two and a half years, she was dead also.' It was the most traumatic of times for Hobsbawm, barely into his teens, and his sister, Nancy. They were near to destitution. 'My father did not leave much behind except his boxing cups, his season ticket, with photo ID, for the Vienna transport system, and a substantial collection of English books, mostly the paperbacks produced by the German firm of Tauchnitz...' The story of how, via Sidney and Gretl in Berlin, and then Aunt Mimi Grun in Britain, he made his way to Cambridge and a career of profound distinction is told with a self-deprecation which somehow seems to shrug the wonders aside. Yet it is fascinating, almost awe-inspiring. Another hymn to the wonders of transmigration. How do you balance that human tale alongside the politics - the Communism - that dominated so much of Hobsbawm's life? He himself does not try to very hard. He goes, as an old man, to the Vienna cemetery to find his parents' graves. But they are lost, gone. The politics and the personal may be fused - first in the cauldron of Berlin as National Socialism boiled over and then in the common rooms by the Cam - but you swiftly find where Hobsbawm's passions will take him: wrestling with the spectre of Stalin, adjusting to the monstrous disillusion of Hungary, finally admitting a faith that failed. That is both an enlightenment and a slight shame. It is enlightening, especially in the age of Martin Amis, because we are told, across the mist of decades, how Communism inspired and united in the Thirties and how, through the Forties, it was a natural resting place for many of the brightest and the best. No stigma (until the Fifties); no froth about evil empires. Signing up at university was a choice over sherry, not a fateful decision. The Apostles took their politics with   water biscuits and Cheddar. Hobsbawm explains wryly and well how things changed (just as Martin's dad became 'a reactionary club bar buffer') but he never quite conveys why he waited so long to change and see the wreck of the Soviet Union for what it was. His instincts and loyalties - compare and contrast Roy Hattersley's former championing of the Labour Party right or wrong - had become tribal. There is a narrowing, a tapering as the book goes on. We retreat from the broad plains of history into smoke-filled rooms where sects plot, splinter, make diagnoses of society which promptly implode. There are moments - of course there are moments - when the influence is greater than that: say the high tide of  Marxism Today. But too much of it, too, verges on ideological introversion, the pursuit of a flame that died; the precise opposite of history making. Does Hobsbawm himself acknowledge that? Partly so. He has chosen his subjects, he says, 'intuitively and accidentally'. Do they make 'a coherent whole'? Not quite: the final chapters - especially where they begin rampaging over Bush's America - are little more than vivid journalism: super-Pilgerism.   Is its totality, though, 'an introduction to the most extraordinary century in the world's history through the itinerary of one human being whose life could not possibly have occurred in any other?' Yes. Even in old age, it is still a beginning and beginning again. Hobsbawm's personal flame seems undimmed. His interesting times are also extraordinary.