The Angry Young Men<br />by Humphrey Carpenter<br />Allen Lane £18.99, pp256<br /> Why were the young men - in this 'literary comedy of the 1950s' - angry? Were they, indeed, angry at all - rather than binge drinkers on the morning after, or chronic fornicators beset by post-coital exhaustion?  Humphrey Carpenter, prolific and pungent, does not really know the answer to these questions. Every time he mentions the AYM, we get a touch of what IDS would call 'flim-flam'. Was there something serious here, joining Kingsley Amis, Philip Larkin, John Osborne and Colin Wilson (plus hangers on) as forces who changed society? Or was this just a movement as in bowels? Search me, says Humphrey. Maybe the whole idea doesn't add up to more than a  Daily Mail feature, duly cribbed by the  Daily Express. But he says it so disarmingly, with so much wit and scholarship, that conclusions don't really matter. What matters is what your learn along the way.   Clearings of the undergrowth come first, though. The early Fifties were a time in search of a wake-up call. A trip to the theatre? Choose between Terence Rattigan, Charles Morgan and Christopher Fry. Curl up with a good book at the cusp where Evelyn began to turn into Auberon Waugh. There were no voices which seemed to take post-war life as it was - gritty, repressed, overwhelmingly provincial, even in London suburbia - and make something vibrant of it.   'The young,' wrote Al Alvarez, 'were a pusillanimous bunch, careful with their emotions, respectful of their elders... a generation of good children'. Then things started to get more interesting. Academic life - out in the boondocks of Swansea - could be brilliantly bilious. We were lucky to meet  Lucky Jim. Poetry could be mordant and personal, as Larkined up as your mum and dad. The theatre could be a soaring tirade of invective as Osborne produced his first great rants. Philosophy (monstrous delusion!) could be more than A. J. Ayer chuffling away: it was Colin Wilson, a 24-year-old Adam's apple in an oatmeal polo neck sweater putting the great names of European literature together with some dodgy linking material, calling it  The Outsider and selling in tens of thousands. We were not, in short, all doomed, all trapped. We could make waves of our own.   Wilson came from Leicester (the city down the road from where I lived). I went to hear him lecture impenetrably to the local WEA and bought myself an oatmeal polo on the strength of it. Larkin got a job at Leicester University (a hastily converted lunatic asylum, as Carpenter observes, where Amis came to visit and thought 'Christ, somebody ought to do something with this... Not that it was too awful - well, only a bit'). Jimmy Porter, trapped on a stagnant Sunday with only the posh papers between him and delirium, was the archetypal victim of the provincial sabbath breaking free. 'Nobody thinks, nobody cares. No beliefs, no convictions and no enthusiasm - just another Sunday evening.' I had seen the future and the future was Leicester   It did not last, of course. Wilson went    from obscure hero to zero with his second book. Amis, flushed by success, soon became metropolitan again, a consumer of fine claret, not a swigger of gut rot. The North of Braine and Barstow became 'real life' (where lasses got in the club, lad, and fathers wanted their daughters wed). Larkin pushed off to Hull. Iris Murdoch and Doris Lessing were - bizarrely - designated AYMs. Age turned Amis and Osborne into crusted  Spectator readers and John Braine into Norman Tebbit.   There, with hindsight, is Carpenter's 'comedy'. It was and is a hoot. You couldn't make it up: a series of anecdotes and ropey linkages played for farce, as ephemeral as the posh papers Jimmy Porter loathed so much.   But, beneath the froth of entertainment, illumination lies - particularly in   the friendships and rivalries which had substance rather than hype. Larkin and Kingsley Amis were best mates at St John's College, Oxford, and long after. John Wain was at St John's at the same (Forties) time and more swiftly successful than either of them: a don, a respectable rebel without much of a cause, a talent doomed to flicker and fade. Amis's letters to Larkin are anal parodies of the Eng Lit courses they both endured. So much for the 'Cunterbelly tales'. When J. B. Leishman, his tutor, praises Chaucer's humour, 'I could hardly keep myself from breaking wind in his face'. And as for Wordsworth and Dorothy, 'they ought to be put together in a big house... and scalded to death with urine-stream'.   Is this, already heading towards his thirties after years at war, the authen tic voice of Amis, Booker Prize winner and Grand Old Devil? It is certainly part of the equation, niftily culled by Carpenter from existing letters and biographies and woven into an account of the relationship with Larkin in a way which makes Amis far less of a super-ego and far more of a bruised soul re-working the disappointments of his own life as hilarious fiction. Through Larkin, in sum, you can get to know Amis much better - and Larkin's own letters ('all women are stupid beings... marriage seems such a revolting institution') add something in return. Meanwhile, Wain withers on a bow of faint praise, to the ill-disguised satisfaction of the men he thought were friends.   Sooner or later, maybe, Carpenter will find a moment to retrace his steps   and deliver a deeper meditation on this Oxford triangle. St John's (a vindication of the traduced and insulted Leishman) was the influential English Literature college of the Forties and Fifties. Wain and Amis and Larkin stand at the heart of this gossipy, wholly entertaining book - and deserve greater attention of their own, because they were a fit, playing out their own, edgy dramas, wrestling with their own demons.   But in the meantime, these young and angry operators encapsulate not so much an era as a couple of fleeting years: born in 1954, washed up by 1957; a movement that had no act to get together, which broke bottles and hearts indiscriminately; which raved and sold out and wallowed in absurdity; as lasting as a headline in the  Mail, as important as a leader in the  Express, an inchoate mix of tops and flops. And yet ... at the going down of Chateau Margaux, we do remember them.