The Women Who Lived For Danger<br />by Marcus Binney<br />Hodder &amp; Stoughton £20, pp395 Here, names carved with suitable pride, is the story of Churchill's Special Operations Executive, bearer of sabotage and subversion to Nazi-occupied Europe. Well-trodden ground over half a century, strewn with memoirs from almost everybody concerned (not to mention the stamp of historian MRD Foot). Thus, at one level, there isn't much new left to say about the organisation that Hugh Dalton, Minister of Economic Warfare, wanted built like 'the Sinn Fein movement in Ireland'. But Marcus Binney, toiling through archives and interviews with those who survived, has found two themes which make a real difference. One - Binney's central point - is to tell us that Odette Hallowes and Violette Szabo, heroines of later movie legend, were not alone, that SOE depended for its success and survival on finding girls in shops or typing pools who could speak a language (usually French) well enough to survive behind enemy lines. Add Virginia Hall, Noor Inayat Khan, Pearl Witherington and many more to this hall of fame. The women who Colonel Maurice Buckmaster and his personnel amanuensis, the thriller writer Selwyn Jepson, recruited were often very young and totally inexperienced, but they were resourceful and brave. They deserve to be remembered for what they were, an ad-hoc sisterhood who went willingly to war, not a collection of individuals. The second theme, however, reads somewhat less inspiritingly in the wake of 11 September. Was SOE, as John Keegan claims, 'unnecessarily dangerous to work for, ineffective in its pursuit of its aims and counter-productive in the results achieved'? Perhaps. It certainly didn't survive the end of the war, and the RAF, for one, would much have preferred to use the available cash on Bomber Command rather than maquis derring-do. At least, though, we have some chance of making an informed judgment. At least Special Operations, in Binney's words, 'is the only part of the secret services at this time for which a substantial archive is available'. What MI5 may at last be getting round to, in short, the SOE made possible long ago. Dalton, following Churchill's orders, set out to create something which could 'co-ordinate all action by way of subversion and sabotage against the enemy overseas'. It 'would absorb some elements of existing organisations, but would be on a much greater scale, with much wider scope and largely manned by new personnel'. We know what they called it 62 years ago, but what might they have called it today? Try the Department for Homeland Security for starters. Because the SOE is history - dead and gone - no one needs to protect its reputation any longer, to nurture or confect a record of supposedly constant success. No one needs dwell too long on the extenuating circumstances of true pressure in life-or-death conflict, either. The edifice that Dalton, Charles Hambro and Buckmaster built was always bound to be a touch rickety, constructed in haste from the materials at hand. But there's rickety... and rickety. Take Paddy O'Sullivan, a slip of an Irish girl reporting to her circuit commander near Argenton. 'I was horrified,' he observed, 'when I found out she could not even ride a bicycle.' It was a vital skill. Her job, after all, was carrying messages. She'd had six weeks' demolition and weapon training, but they had to teach her to ride a bike, teetering anxiously along a public road. Take the finest of all the woman agents, Christina Granville, and her partner, Andrew Kowerski, holed up in Cairo in 1942 when a Polish general gets an utterly wrong message about Kowerski's loyalty and leaves them both in the lurch. 'It's chaos,' one observer tells a visiting Anthony Eden. It's a stew of 'jealousy, suspicion and intrigue', concludes another. Come what may, no acts are ever got together and Granville herself is deserted at the end of the war, left to work as a teashop waitress and a second-class stewardess on a cruise ship. She didn't deserve that: she didn't deserve the forgetfulness of chaps who left her to scrape by and then, tragically, be murdered by a madman. Take Violette Szabo, betrayed back at the ranch by the double agent, Henri Dericourt, who then escapes scot-free from an official inquiry. Or Noor Inayat Khan - 'Bang Away Lulu', they called her because of the way she battered out her Morse code - thrust into peril without proper security training, dispatched to Paris to make contact with a controller called Garry (because he looked like Gary Cooper) and asked to identify herself by declaring: 'Je viens de la part de votre ami Antoine pour des nouvelles au sujet de la Societe en Batiment.' 'Allo, 'allo, 'allo! She kept records of all the messages she'd sent. The Germans seized them and used them to destroy mission after mission, just as they broke the codes of the SOE in Holland and produced one of the great intelligence humiliations of the war. When one SOE chief arrived in Normandy in June, 1944, he found at least 10 allegedly loyal organisations in German hands, dining on British food from botched parachute drops. Yet these debacles - just a choice selected from a long, long list - aren't bucks to be left at Buckmaster's door. They are symptomatic of a condition which seems to have afflicted the Germans in equal measure. Christina Granville wafts back and forth across Nazi lines in eastern Europe time after time as though they didn't exist. Paola Del Din, a Friuli girl barely out of her teens, does the same in Italy. The Gestapo has women agents in the cells and ineptly turn them loose. Noor Inayat Khan escapes and nearly - so agonisingly nearly - wins her freedom. Paddy O'Sullivan runs a maquis region and shows us, along the way, how powerful the French Resistance was as D-Day came. Who really liberated the South of France? The Americans claimed the credit, but the French (with a little help from London) did the job. We're used to thinking of occupied Europe as a cohesive area, conquered and ruled with a ruthless efficiency. It wasn't. War brings its own shambles and secret operations are an umbilical part of that bumbling mess. From 1941 to 11 September, 2001, nothing fundamental changes. The glory of remembering the SOE is that nobody minds admitting it. The courage of those who fought this special way is remarkable; the chaos which so often engulfed them is part of the human condition. Perhaps Binney never quite shapes the wealth of the material he's amassed into a tight enough thesis. These women, living for danger, largely stagger from crisis to crisis, chased by constant events. Only their sex and resilience unites them. But there are still many tales here worth telling and pictures which capture a particular quality. Granville's laconic beauty is timeless. Szabo has a heartrending fragility. Noor Inayat Khan's eyes, looking out from beyond the grave, are haunting. It is a book to dip in and out of and relish. More than that, it captures a manic truth about terror - whether in the imbecility of an al-Qaeda hand trying to set off the bomb in his trainer aboard a jumbo jet or Virginia Hall hiking gallantly across the Pyrenees with the wooden leg she called Cuthbert.