The Gold Train<br />by Ronald Zweig<br />Allen Lane £20, pp336 The story itself, crudely encapsulated, seems made for Hollywood recycling. Indeed, John Frankenheimer and Burt Lancaster more or less did that four decades ago. But 'The Train' of Frankenheimer's imagination was stuffed with art treasures and heroic resistance leaders heading for freedom. One in the eye for Hitler. The Gold Train, a train of thought and grisly reality, sits in Austrian tunnels and Hungarian sidings for many non-cinematic weeks on end. There is a fortune supposedly worth $300 million on the way to Berchtesgaden or Zurich or somewhere, looted from Hungarian Jews by Magyar fellow-travellers and crooks. Tens of thousands of those Jews are dead. Their blood-stained gold teeth are stacked in crates. But where is the triumph of good over evil that would make a good movie? Villain number one - the Nazi intelligence supremo in Budapest - becomes headmaster of a boarding school for rich boys and dies in requisite affluence as recently as 1999. Villain number two has not been heard from for 45 years (though there is nothing to suggest that those years proved anything less than entirely comfortable, since he proved a dab hand at stashing away). And the $300 million or more? Little by little, through years of argument and pursuit and futility, it dwindles into insignificance. So: much of the cash goes - eventually - to help the survivors of the Holocaust and the birth of Israel. So: what does the (pivotal) American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee get in the end? It gets $618,000 - 1.2 per cent of its 1949 budget, enough working capital to last four days. Ronald Zweig, a history lecturer at Tel Aviv University, has a monumental theme to develop here, a tale of brutality and corruption doused in a warm bath of myth-making. The train run by Colonel Arpad Toldi, Commissioner for Jewish Affairs in the fascist government of Ferenc Szalasi, which disintegrated as the Red Army pushed   across Hungary, was both a symbol of evil (for Toldi knew where the tons of gold and gems and fine carpets came from) and of mankind's capacity for self-delusion (since dozens of Hungarian civil servants who climbed aboard thought they were saving their nation's fortune for better times). By the highest standards, Zweig lacks the vision or eloquence to tell such a searing story. He is a careful plodder. He cannot transfuse the base metal in the box car into something greater. But plodding - prudent, diligent scholarship - offers its own rewards. Nobody much writes about Hungary these days. Nobody took the result of Hungary's last general election - a totally unpredicted lurch to the left on the same day that Le Pen took France lurching right - and remembered how, through the first half of the last century, Hungary had always been a basket case of extremism and constantly changing frontiers. Nobody, this spring, dwelt on Budapest's future as a capital of the enlarged Europe which will be with us by 2004. The Gold Train is no straightforward history of one of our continent's most complex and troubled nations, but it does set the complexities and troubles in a lucid, scholarly context. Those who forget what came before the 1956 uprising would do well to read and remember - just as those who took April's election result for granted would do well to rejoice. We have learnt the basics of the Second World War and, through the decades, turned them into a simple yarn of dungeons and dragons. It was never so. Hungary did not simply find itself an Axis acolyte; the roots of that madness lay in the decay of empire and the impact of a language apart. The Soviet army did not simply arrive and conquer the East. On the contrary, it toiled for months while Colonel Toldi loaded his carriages with treasure, then chugged off in search of the safety of the Bavarian mountain redoubt the Fhrer never got round to building. Hungary's Jews were not simple victims; they were divided in wealth and loyalties, thousands hanging heroically on to be part of Nagy's new model state in spite of everything. The triumphant allies did not opt for simple restitution; rather, amid the chaos that was peace, they played politics - the French using Toldi's looted gold to put the squeeze on Budapest's new masters, the British slowing down reparations to keep Ben Gurion's embryo homeland on a drip feed. Zweig knows there are no simple answers. He carves diligently away in search of reasonable conclusions which can make this supreme time of unreason comprehensible. Was the $300 million ever there? Was it always gross exaggeration? Perhaps: but the way he relates such wealth to the manners of the society which nurtured it and which, bestially deprived of that nurture, saw its value shrivel, is both subtle and wise. Can you be rich in isolation? There is gold of a different kind here, and a train journey with thinking time to spare.