Primo Levi<br />Ian Thomson<br />Hutchinson £25, pp640 Publishing can be a brutal game of chance. When, in 1947, Primo Levi had finished  If This Is a Man , he found only rejection slips and disillusion. Then at last the house of Antonicelli took him up. But Levi's haunting story of Auschwitz was released almost simultaneously with  The Path to the Nest of Spiders, Italo Calvino's buoyant tale of partisan revolt. Two young and brilliant Italian writers, two accounts of war remembered: Levi and Calvino were reviewed together and sold together. Immediately, the upbeat Calvino, feeling good about the new Italy, had his bestseller. The horror of the Holocaust seemed somehow out of time, too near to confront. It would be a decade before one of the great books of the twentieth century was reissued and seen across the world for what it was. Ian Thomson, perhaps, may smile wryly over this experience. His biography of Levi - 640 pages and 10 years in the writing - appears simultaneously with Carole Angier's The Double Bond, 928 pages traversing the same terrain. No ordinary reader is going to tackle both. Thus, Thomson and Angier are reviewed together, compared, sold against each other. Must it be 10 more years before they can be seen separately for what they are? I hope not, for Thomson, on his own, distinctive merits, has surely written one of the best literary biographies of the year. Like Angier, he deserves to stand alone. Shrewdly, too, he has provided what any lover of Levi needs close by: not a critical interpretation or reinterpretation, but a readers' companion. Levi, from If This is a Man to The Drowned and the Saved, essentially wrote the story of his own life as enhanced reality. There is no point in trying to compete with that. Nobody could say it better; nobody can approach its emotional truth. But knowing the background and the context - the rotting and corrupt Italy Levi grew up in; the rhythms of Jewish existence in the closed, claustrophobic Turin of the Thirties - adds another potential layer of understanding, and Thomson supplies it with an exemplary mastery of detail and rare narrative verve. He is particularly good on the politics as a weak, vainglorious Mussolini slithers from his own brand of fascism (one which the student Levi and many of his Jewish friends blandly embraced) into a craven aping of Hitler. Auschwitz may have been the visceral experience which transformed Levi from a bright chemistry student,   keen on mountaineering and shy of girls, into a most unlikely giant, but there are continuities from school and university which return and are always with him. He was a chemist first and last, 30 years as manager of a paint and varnish factory, a day job which both gave and drained energy. He stayed in the same Turin house almost all his days. His mother, a hopeless invalid, was his responsibility to the last. He died at 67, plunging himself three floors down into the stairwell of his home. Thomson met Levi quite close to the end and pays tribute to the help that Levi's sister, Anna Maria, gave him. But if there is one mistake here, it comes in the final hundred pages or so as Levi briefly becomes a personality, lionised around the interview circuit, talking to Philip Roth, Michael Kustow, even Sue MacGregor. Can anybody on that chat circuit really escape the trap of patter recited? The quotes, in their cocktail-party way, lose intensity, wisdom for rent. Levi hovers on the brink of becoming one of that most horrendous species - a celebrity - and thus the circumstances of his decline, the reasons for his suicide, must have their celebrity exploration. Why did he do it? Sickness, despair, writer's block, the pall of Auschwitz? Ian Thomson doesn't know and can only theorise, but the theorising itself is also a trivialising. You don't need to know why Primo Levi killed himself to know that  If This is a Man and  The Truce are masterpieces which will long outlive any such speculation. It is the controlled passion, the lucidity, the vivid sense of testimony which matter, not stories about an end unforetold. When this biography stays on the high ground of painstaking detail, however, illuminating what Levi wrote by its scholarship, piecing together the people and the influences with measured perception, it is often superb. Levi, I think, would have appreciated it, just as, unadorned, we appreciate a writer of whom one young Italian collaborator said: 'I thought he had la verita rivelata, the truth revealed to him.