The Long Recessional: The Imperial Life of Rudyard Kipling<br />David Gilmour<br />John Murray £22.50, pp362 The point about Kipling is that - chronologically, instinctively - he was a journalist first. Kipling's years on the  Civil and Military Gazette in Lahore and the Allahabad Pioneer  weren't an irrelevant preface to what followed, to the novels, tales and flood of poetry: they were his grounding and education, his encounter with humanity. Why was he so swiftly bored by promotion to a bigger desk in Allahabad? Because - by the time he was 22 - he had already become an eternal foreign correspondent, a wanderer. The grass was always greener. Six short years of India were enough. And later on, when the sharp-penned young reporter became a man of letters, he was still a journalist: but now a pundit, a seer, a Rees-Mogg or Paul Johnson. If you wonder why he'd lost it by the time he was 40, then look no further. He had, quite simply, ceased to live the humbler life of inquiry and questioning; he had become a fount of opinion, talking the talk but seldom walking the walk. David Gilmour - a meticulous scholar and shrewd companion - is   especially good on the first half of Kipling's life. His aim is, in a sense, to approach the literary lion of Empire through the front door, to take his image and his influence - and explain it from the outside in. That he does brilliantly well. There was an element of luck, of course. The thin, balding 23-year-old who came to London and was instantly hailed as 'greater than Dickens' on the strength of his Indian Railway Library stories couldn't have guessed that England was suddenly of a mood to embrace and glory in its colonial conquests, that his  Plain Tales  of toiling Tommies far away would set new popular horizons. He was the man who came at a complex, resonant hour. He could also, in the grace and force of his writing, lay claim to something beyond high talent. Genius? It may still be unfashionable to say it - and Gilmour does so only circumspectly - but the case, particularly for the poetry, is cogently made. Time and the liberalism he loathed may have withered Kipling, so that much of his work seems faded and fulminating; yet there are phrases   here that will endure forever in the national consciousness. The tumult and the shouting will never die, the captains and the kings be always with us. He also possessed a pawky independence that sets him apart. One moment he would seem the natural laureate of the Colonel Blimps, the next be laying about them with a will. Kipling, in that way, never lost his integrity, no matter how far he wandered to the right. His awful warnings - about war with Germany or the coming of apartheid - demanded to be heard. But were they? Here's where Gilmour loses the plot a little. While Kipling could mine his Indian experience - from  Kim  to the  Jungle Books  - he had a unique voice. You could claim something similar for the white men's burdens around the Boer War, when Kipling was, in effect, still a foreign correspondent and chum of Rhodes: our chap on the spot. After that, however, after years of marriage to the lumpen Carrie and too much family tragedy, he became merely a grand old lion consigned to winter. What he said - or wrote for the  Telegraph  and Morning Post - may have been right or wrong; but it didn't matter because Kipling himself had ceased to matter. The circus had moved to another town. Gilmour would like us to see Kipling's fall into impotent seclusion as some kind of parallel for the fall of   the Empire itself. It doesn't quite work, because the causes of the fall were so different (and too much dragging through the Asquiths, Balfours and Bonar Laws comes to seem A-level history re-heated). But some things do strike home; the designation of Churchill as a 'Kipling imperialist', the echoes of the Battle of Britain in the verse of 50 years before. Can we forget Kipling? No, because he's part of us, part of the national psyche. Can we understand him better, reconcile the good, the bad and the ugly? Only if we dissect: only if we can separate the spirit of Lahore from the blowhard. 'For frantic boast and foolish word - Thy Mercy on Thy People, Lord