Woman of Today<br />Sue MacGregor<br />Headline £20, pp352 The interesting thing is what people find interesting about this autobiography. When I went into Broadcasting House the other day, canteen culture seekers were still heaving over the  Daily Mail extracts. Dame Sue's nights of passion with Leonard Rossiter, Robin Day, the top KGB man in London? The precise, modulated voice of Middle England gagging over a string of guys? It's a seemingly irresistible pitch, well worth the tabloid loot. Yes, but it's not very interesting. The affairs are mentioned casually, in a bored monotone, and then stowed away in some filing cabinet. Not so much kiss-and-tell as type-and-file. The only fascinating question that arises is how affronted MacGregor would have been, say, five years ago if the  Daily Mail had unilaterally spilled exactly the same beans. Call for the privacy legal eagles? What unexpectedly Steamy Sue finds interesting herself, of course, is her part in The Show, the scratchy mornings with Brian and John and Jim and Anna, the dawn joustings with Peter Mandelson and Dr Mawhinney. But memories of  Today (as with most journalists' reminiscences) have a nasty habit of fading fast: if yesterday's newspapers are fish and chips, the past decade's  Today shows are deep-fried coelacanth, preserved only in the endemically self-reverential cocoon of BBC history. Today's strength - indeed, its enduring brilliance - is that it is just what it says: about today. It doesn't live on like an old  Goon Show; it always moves on, sucking new power from events. The connection is live, between listener and subject; it doesn't, years later, respond to third-party mediation by a presenter who was there at the time. Nor is there any theme which can give it coherence. MacGregor tries to find one in the struggle of women to front live news shows and the way (perhaps) that she didn't get a Humphrys-sized contract. With the greatest of respect, though, surrounding tales of triumphs unwinding don't quite fit with her one-woman human rights crusade. She's reduced to complaining what a disaster Lord Birt proved, which, in current circumstances, is like complaining that it always rains on bank holidays. No, what's really interesting about these memoirs isn't the tabloid teasing or the studio tattle, but the makeweight pages, the chapters on growing up in Cape Town and making it through the long nights of London secretarial drifting to the commanding heights of  Woman's Hour. She writes plainly, without adornment, but she has a gift for names and details. Here's a very junior Sue and her mate, Gay Beresford, farmed out for the afternoon to Gay's grandma's large Xhosa maid, Ellen, while granny pushes off to play bridge. Ellen scoops up the two little girls an ancient car stuffed with friends and drives them out to Langa township for cups of sweet tea. Granny goes berserk when she finds out ('Most whites had never been near a black township'). Ellen just hangs on to her job. Small, incremental tales; names you couldn't invent, as Miss Sprules and Miss Glyka teach her typing down the Banbury Road. MacGregor captures a young gel's time and places to perfection. She also shows how nice, how sympathetic, she could be. Take this sweet, shrewd Sue every time, I think, as she bows out of our mornings. That's what we'll miss, not the macho chomping with John et Jim.