No Ordinary Man<br />Dominic Carman<br />Hodder and Stoughton £18.99, pp309 George Carman was not infallible. Ten days before he died, too ill to go on with the task of writing his life story, he turned the job over to his son, Dominic. 'I'm not going to be able to do it. You'd better have a go'. Thus, one short step beyond the grave, a supposedly forensic book about courtroom battles turned into a tacky tale of ungorgeous George the bisexual, the binge-drinker, the compulsive gambler; George the wife-beater and rotten pop. After Mommy Dearest, Daddy Dearest. Filial revenge has rarely tasted so rancid. In (tabloid) theory, that should make for a riveting read. The greatest attack-dog barrister of his day revealed as a lonely, sometimes vicious inadequate. In practice, it is merely pathetic, demeaning for all concerned. 'I was letting him down again,' groans Dom after some dbcle. 'But the encouragement I craved was never forthcoming... praise was something he could not give, yet constantly demanded for himself: a common paradox of the high achiever.' Pass the sick bag, Malice. And the question, already, is why we should care about Carman, pre or fils? No career fades more comprehensively than that of the celebrity silk. His triumphs, not even recorded by video camera, live on only in the minds of those who saw him perform. They, along with the details of his cases and the reputations of his clients, soon wither and perish. Nothing he says, none of his quotable quotes, speaks to the man. They are only words, only arguments adduced for (or against) clients like Robert Maxwell. Does it matter when we find here that Carman, the hammer of Gillian Taylforth, much shocked by booze and sex, was in thrall to both those gods himself? No, it doesn't matter: the advocate is, by design, a brilliant pyrotechnician, not some guardian of higher morality. The taxi stops at the rank; the wig goes on; the rest is role-playing. I think it wholly likely that George Carman wasn't much of a husband or father. Three broken marriages and Dominic testify to that. He wasn't much of a philosopher either. His Balliol (first class) mind spent too many evenings propped against a bar, yacking with mates or propositioning some passing blonde. Politics, as opposed to the flattery of politicians, never interested him. He could be tetchily pompous one minute and fawning the next. But this has absolutely no bearing on his achievements; it is, in the strictest sense, irrelevant. Quite simply, Carman had the talent of a born phrasemaker, a razor wit and a gift for simplification which juries found empathetic and judges compelling. (Be interesting: always try to keep the judge awake.) He might, from his early years in Blackpool, have made the stage his career. In fact, he found and fashioned an altogether more satisfactory stage for himself, one where, shoulders drooping, voice trailing towards a whisper, he was always the star. What would he have made of the case for the (personal) prosecution as delivered here by the boy he trusted? There's plenty of mitigation on offer, of course. If Dominic had a rough childhood, so did his dad. The besetting loneliness came early, left on the latchkey of a deserted home. These schooldays were often brutal and always unhappy. George had to fight his way up, washing dishes, doing the most menial legal chores. Success and riches came late - really only from the end of the Seventies, and the Jeremy Thorpe trial, on. There was little that was gorgeous about his long, bitter route to the top. He was an archetypal outsider, the sort of chap who'd never make a judge, you know. A drinker and a driver. But such mitigation may not be necessary in any case. George, that voice sliding towards a whisper again, never used a bludgeon; Dominic throws in the kitchen sink. Ursula (wife one) solemnly testifies: 'Before our marriage, I had been looking forward to a bit of romping on the bed. But there was nothing; the marriage was never consummated.' Celia (wife two and Dominic's mum) goes on about the 'really sinister mental violence' he inflicted on her, the 'tongue-lashing and lack of self-esteem', but, like Ursula, she has her extramarital affairs, too, one of them with George Best. Frances (wife three) 'accepted his request to admit adultery, though she had always been faithful; to get away, she would have agreed to anything'. None of it quite washes, at least in the black-and-white way Dominic lays it out. Why, faced with such supposed cruelty, were the wives all so supine? Why, physically or verbally battered, didn't they threaten a career more vulnerable than most? Why are their remembrances of George so utterly banal? 'When I committed adultery and told him what I'd been up to, he went ballistic,' prattles Ursula. 'He was really surprised because he didn't think I was sexy.' Dominic treats Karen Phillips - the lawyer who shared some of his father's last 15 years - with a sniping contempt. He doesn't explain how the clerks and juniors who worked with Carman in New Court Chambers retained such a keen affection for this monster, why, with all his faults, they were still proud to stand in his shadow. He can't adequately account for George's bravery in working on as his cancer spread. The best he can say is that Carman's life was 'a masquerade, and the true identity of the man underneath remains unknown'. And, if you collect clichs, 'that he left deep footprints in the legal sands of time.' Not good enough (in perception, judgment, prose or, most dismayingly, fact-checking). The bile flows too fast and free, filling the cracks between the case studies. One day, maybe, there'll be a book about George Carman which does justice to his essential brilliance and leaves the garbage in the can. But, for that to happen, the spotlight has to stay on the only stage that counts: in court, not caught playing some hand-me-down version of Joe Lampton. Leave out the personal stuff, Carman said. 'It's far too difficult to talk about.' Self-protection? Perhaps not. Perhaps more a realisation that some things are important and some things - dead or alive - are the detritus of existence, the trivialities of pain and opportunities lost which heal nothing - and tell us nothing that is useful.