Pulitzer: A Life<br />Denis Brian<br />John Wiley £22.50, pp448 It is one of those amazing stories, one of those only-in-America stories. A 17-year-old Hungarian Jew - beanpole scrawny with weak eyesight and not a word of English - stalks out of his reviled stepfather's Budapest home and tries to join the French Foreign Legion. It doesn't want him - but Abe Lincoln does, to fight for the Union in a faraway civil war. Forty years later he's a multi-millionaire, a legend, the founding father of modern journalism. To Pulitzer goes the ultimate prize. Extraordinary men, of course, can also be extraordinary pains in the backside. Joseph Pulitzer was that, too: a chilly father and husband, a tyrant and self-pitying ranter, a man obsessed by his  Post-Dispatch and his  New York World. He must have been lousy to work for. But still, you rather wish you'd had the chance. The fascination of Denis Brian's meticulously researched biography comes in the comparing and contrasting. What's different about the journalism of 120 years ago, and what's the same? Some things are wholly different - the overt mix of newspaper ownership and personal political ambition, for instance; the American fascination with foreign news, because the old countries were still quite new to them; the Wild West feel of St Louis, frontier city, where editors could shoot complaining readers dead, and did. But the edge and the excitement are constants, fuelled by the great god competition. Wherever papers compete you may yet sense the ghost of Pulitzer; wherever shirt sleeves are rolled up, he's there. When you survey the current, flaccid reaches of American journalism, dominated by monopoly chains anxious not to utter a cheep out of place against this 'war' for fear of scaring Wall Street or the local Rotary club, you hanker for a lost age of passion and invective. Who will rid us of the 'satanic journalism' peddled by this 'leprous Jew'? the  New York Times once asked. And who, in turn, will kick over the tables of consensus and respectability? Pulitzer was sometimes wrong and occasionally wild, but he was always honest. From time to time, he used his newspapers as the vehicles for his own   political ambition, yet he was never a politician first. Three months stuck in Congress missing the roar of the presses was enough for him. Though he cared passionately about what his comment pages said, his essential power came from what his papers reported - the corruption, the crime, the violence - and his ultimate gift lay in picking brilliant people to turn over the stones. Nelly Bly, the slip of the girl who masqueraded as a mental hospital patient to reveal the foulness behind closed doors and then raced alone round the earth in record time, would adorn any paper today. So would James Creelman, the king of resourceful war reporters, and David Ferguson, who exposed the first Equitable Life insurance scandal. The stars did not always stay faithful to Pulitzer. Especially in his last 20 years - blind, sick, touring the Med in his yacht but staying in touch minute by minute in complex code for fear of Hearst - he could be a wearisome control freak. It's significant, though, how many of those who left him for a bigger jobs and fatter salaries later returned. The saddest thing is that the only legacy he truly cared about withered and perished without him. The sons who took over the  New York World soon stripped its assets and sold it. There was no empire built to last because Pulitzer - absorbed by words on paper, causes, stories - did not retreat to a businesslike distance and construct one. He was a newspaper actor-manager at heart, not a tycoon. He began the Columbia School of Journalism, but the tasks which absorbed him day by day were mostly as ephemeral as yesterday's headlines. Brian writes with energy and pace, though without great reflection, taking the boasts of the  World at face value. But Pulitzer's raw, complex personality remains elusive. He is merely amazing. Pulitzer might have liked something uplifting for an epitaph - one of those quotes about 'democracy and truth' he was always delivering - but the best defence came from his hired hand, Creelman. 'How little they know of "yellow journalism", who denounce it! How swift they are to condemn its shrieking headlines, its exaggerated pictures, its coarse buffoonery, its intrusions... And how blind to its unfearing warfare against rascality, its detection and prosecution of crime, its costly searching of knowledge to the ends of the earth, its exposure of humbug, its endless funds for the quick relief of distress.' More than a million New Yorkers agreed, because here was a paper - at last - for them, not their bosses; here was a paper a warrior editor made.