Sea Room<br />Adam Nicholson<br />HarperCollins £14.99, pp256 A House in Corfu<br />Emma Tennant<br />Jonathan Cape £16.99, pp244 Once upon a time, D. H. Lawrence wrote in a baleful, eponymous little story: 'There was a man who loved islands. He was born on one, but it didn't suit him, as there were too many people on it... he wanted an island all of his own: not necessarily to be alone on it, but to make it a world of his own.' And here, in separate but intertwined ways, are two tales of these 'I-lands'.  Adam Nicolson's are the Shiants, 550 deserted acres of rock, mud and scrub set in the windswept sea four miles north of Lewis. Emma Tennant's is Corfu where, almost 40 years ago, her father made a home.   I-lands? That's Nicolson's own encapsulation of Lawrence's thesis. Develop it and one skein of Shiant history begins to unravel. Lawrence was into literary backbiting as usual, launching a snide attack on Compton Mackenzie, who owned and wrote with oleaginous lyricism about the isles. But Mackenzie ran out of cash and sold his three precious gems. Vita Sackville-West saw them advertised in the  Telegraph. Her grandson, Nigel Nicolson, bought the Shiants for £1,400 and, when Adam was 21, gave them to him. Now Adam is preparing to hand them, in turn, to his own son, Tom. It is exceptionally well done, beautifully written, meticulously researched, personal yet panoramic. Here are the rulers and dwellers of the Shiants since records began. Here are the people of the Bronze Age, the hermits and the   huddled communities of the eighteenth century that waxed, waned and disappeared in abject poverty. Here are the rapacious landlords who crushed the life from the islands. This is much more than an I-land - and yet Nicolson, with a wince, acknowledges that 'neurotic condition', the way 'the inflated self smothers and obliterates all other forms of life.' A touch of the absurd. Enter at the start of his reign the young Nigel, fresh down from Balliol and preparing to welcome Lady Elizabeth Lambart and Margaret Elphinstone, two of London's most glamorous, to the only habitable house. Bloomsbury goes north. Nigel arrives a week early to clear up the mess of winter, but he's forgotten to pack a tin opener. He exists on bread, potatoes and oatmeal. The rats - black plague rats - descend. The girls arrive and shriek in the night as the rats run wild.   Emma Tennant's Corfu, by contrast, is all words and little action. The words are sometimes memorable but too often they drift in a mist of memory and Greek myth above a bare landscape. Her father and his second wife, yachting round the east of the island, see a wondrous bay. Dad, in his late sixties, decides to retire there and build a house he calls Rovinia. Friends and family, including Emma, come down for the hols. Cisterns clog. They go to weddings and funerals and stuff. They eat. When the colonels stage their coup it mucks up airline schedules. They complain about a noisy disco. Time passing is a new supermarket down the road. They eat some more. If Captain Corelli hadn't been double-booked, he might have brought his mandolin. Tennant can do - and has done - much better than this. Nicolson has never done better. This is one I-land we can all share.