Backing Into the Limelight <br />Alexander Games<br />Headline £18.99, pp320 There's an oddness to Alan Bennett. On the one hand, he's one of Britain's most prolific, publicly revered writers, a national treasure; on the other hand, barely anything worthwhile has been written about him or his work over 67 years. On the one hand, he's notoriously shy, stuffing his privacy like a snotty hanky up the sleeve of his Yorkshire parka; on the other, diligent biographers like Alexander Games can fill 300 pages with quotes from old Bennett interviews. Not so much a cuttings job as cuttings as a life's work.  I first (one grammar school boy peering at another) saw Bennett early in 1958. He would take coffee most mornings in an Oxford caf&eacute; called the Kemp which fried its doughnuts fresh on demand, and sit in the corner with a pretty girl; usually Mary Borg from my English lectures. He was tall and gangling and winsomely, boyishly blond. Already famous, already a turn, already knowing it. When my brief career as an amateur magician terminated ignominiously in a church hall in north Oxford, it was Bennett whom the producer of the show (Dudley Moore) sent on to rescue the evening.   Alan Bennett was not, in short, some student Garbo; he was, from the word go, a performer who - on stage and off - played versions of himself. The shrinking, querulous diffidence which made his vicar from  Beyond the Fringe an instant classic was just a part of his act. And any biography worth its salt has to grapple with that amorphous duality. If you want to come to grips with Bennett, you have to decide who he is and what he's about. Games, piling one faded newspaper clipping on top of another, doesn't begin to answer those questions - even, perhaps, to sense that they exist.   Consider his accumulated evidence, though. Here's a lad of the North, a butcher's son from Leeds who still sleeps in his parents' old bed and proudly chairs the Settle and District Conservation Society. Where does he choose when he comes to live in London? Why, Gloucester Crescent, Camden Town, cheek by jowl with Jonathan Miller, Alice Thomas Ellis, Deborah Moggach, David Gentleman,    Claire Tomalin and George Melly (for starters). Not your natural recluse's choice. Is he a lovely, kindly fellow? Most people prepared to be quoted say so: yet the pettifogging rage he vents on chums he falls out with - Patrick Garland or Dudley Moore, again - is legendary. Why does this intensely 'private' chap publish his diaries,  Writing Home , for all to read? Why (after 14 years of silence) does he suddenly gas to a  New Yorker reporter about his requited love for the bouncy lady who now runs a caff in Settle? How do we find out about the new young publishing man in his life? Via a clue in that diary.   None of it coheres - any more than    the body of work of his writing life coheres. Two dozen mostly brilliant television plays, almost all of them rooted in gritty northern life and northern characters - a homage to Dad, Mam and the ghosts of Leeds past; 10 or so major stage plays, almost all of them set in the South and rooted in the lost world of middle-class certainties. If   there's an over-arching theme, it's an elegiac, joke-studded lament for a cosy, departed England: but nothing in the detail gives it shape. Compare and contrast with one Oxford contemporary, Dennis Potter; a howl of anguish, a scream of rage, a soul laid bare when he took up pen. That is not Bennett's way.   Why, Games asks wonderingly, has his undoubted success never quite translated into a mainstream literary reputation? Why, as the box-office queues form, is Bennett not there on the polls among the top 20 British dramatists? A question with many answers, most of them here. Because he can't resist a slick joke ('This ostrich egg was given to us by the people of Samoa,' says his Queen in  A Question of Attribution. 'It hasn't quite found its place yet'). Because the prolific talent of another Gloucester Terrace man, Michael Frayn, has come to overshadow him. Set  Kafka's Dick against  Copenhagen  and the clout is not with him. ('Drama is the backstairs of the intellect.') Because he is, and remains, a blissfully funny performer - a good trouper ready to take over and play himself in  The Lady in the Van and therefore somehow less than serious. Because slices of Pennine life have been soused too long in the last of the summer wine. Because he still writes wonderful sketches and scenes rather than plays.   But there is one other answer to wail over. I think the considerable best of Bennett's work has always been for television. His dry, understated observations of extraordinary ordinary life fit the medium precisely - and his collaboration with Stephen Frears in particular produced some of the finest TV drama of the late Seventies and early Eighties (from London Weekend as well as the BBC). The past 10 years since  102 Boulevard Haussmann, though, have brought only the monologues of  Talking Heads 2 and  Telling Tales: and there's no need to wonder why.   Does the ITV of 2001 commission full-blown, one-off plays any longer? Does the BBC of  Celebrity Sleepover? Alan Bennett hasn't lost the voice and tone that suit him best and bring him to a mass audience. Television, rather, has lost the will and the means to hear and see him, and that is the saddest shame. Even the churning cable channels - recycling every last  Sweeney and  Starsky &amp; Hutch - never pause to find  Sunset Across the Bay or  One Fine Day in their dusty cans. It is the most brutal verdict on what we have become, our roots torn up and buried away.   Games's biography ends, somewhat pathetically, with a whole chapter describing why Bennett wouldn't see him. The cuttings can't compensate because they're essentially random; they never ask the telling question. Thus the adulation grows merely breathless - and you can't blame Alan Bennett for steering clear. Something to hide? Perhaps just embarrassment. But there is, even in the collecting of the material, more than simple utility: there is one elusive story of our times. Who can write it? Maybe the fledgling diarist of Camden Town should settle for something more sinewy; after the Talking Head, the thinking one.