World War 3.0<br />Ken Auletta<br />Profile Books £17.99, pp439<br />Buy it at a discount at BOL From hero to zero. Five years ago, Bill Gates, maker of Microsoft, was  the all-American success story: fabulously rich, relentlessly revered, the altruistic fount of future wisdom. And now?  There's a new Hollywood thriller about to do the multiplex rounds whose arch villain is some nerdy Seattle computer magnate with a taste for murder and ruling the world: a bespectacled Blofeld. The name of the film is  Antitrust. That real rise and berserk fictional fall, of course, is grotesquely overdone (in average movie manner).   Bill Gates still survives at the head of Microsoft - and Microsoft is still huge and profitable and the first name of the computer revolution. But it, and he, are also gravely damaged by almost half a decade in court, losing time and again to the lawyers the US Justice Department hired.   His giant baby (unless providence or George W. Bush intervene) is about to be carved in two by judicial decree. His days as an icon are gone. Ken Auletta of the  New Yorker sets out here to chronicle this fall and fall. It is a rivetting story, a definitive corporate tale for our times, and Auletta has had the time and access to do a great job. He does not quite pull it off - because, as in his previous books, he is too keen on consorting with the rich and famous, a bit of a celeb collector - but he goes deep enough to raise the most profound questions. The foremost of which is: Has Microsoft had a raw deal? We are not, I guess, invited to jump to that conclusion. We are supposed to conclude   that rapacity and ruthlessness and overweening arrogance - the arrogance of Gates - brought it down.   Who but a supercilious idiot would have dared to testify so self-incriminatingly on video before Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson's court? Why tell so many obvious porkies? Why not settle out of court - at three times of asking - rather than bring his company to the brink of disaster through a mix of myopia and petty rages?   Auletta is not in awe of Microsoft, with its jackdaw ways, its profits built on the pioneering work of others; nor does he take Gates at the guru's own, blank-faced valuation. If we are told once that Gates missed the internet revolution until it was (almost) too late, we are told a dozen times. And yet there is still cause for wriggling unease which, with fairness, he expresses well.   What was it that Microsoft did that deserves such legal retribution? Is 'justice' what the Justice Department automatically delivers? This, in essence, was the war of the Netscape browser. Microsoft - too dozy over the potential of the net - saw a more brilliant competitor on a roll and used its clout (and Internet Explorer) to try to shut it out. Typical big boy behaviour; and thus a typical Microsoft way of doing business by trying brutally hard. But how hard do sharp elbows have to dig in in the scrum to rate a yellow card? The customer was not complaining. He got a better, cheaper deal (and, like this customer, could still download Netscape on to his PC if he found Explorer too boringly clunky). Netscape was complaining, but hardly going broke - and, tellingly, would surely have used exactly the same tactics if situations had been reversed. Tied pubs, tied petrol stations, a dominant M&amp;S selling only St Michael: when does formidable muscle turn antitrust? You may, like   Ralph Nader, cheer as rich, choking bullies get their comeuppance: necessary and all too infrequent retribution in corporate America. Who weeps for Standard Oil? But there is, at least, a problem matching petroleum pipelines to the infinite channels of the net.   Bill Neukom, Microsoft's lead attorney, probably makes the case better to Auletta than he ever made it in court. 'Technology is a little like mercury. As I sit here, thinking of the technology business, I can't imagine a monopoly because technology is so fluid.'   Look back, with the business historian Pete Drucker, to the early days of   computers; to Wang, IBM, Remington Rand, Unisys and more. They have all faded from the front row, victims of a fleeting hegemony. That, surely, was the perception that haunted Microsoft, an arrogance born of desperate insecurity. And among those names, perhaps IBM is the most telling of the lot - a company that underwent its own antitrust trial by fire and, through those flames, lost momentum. Watch Microsoft, perhaps, go the same way. Auletta is best when he explores such issues - will AOL, for all its momentary might, endure? - and broods over the bizarre collection of   young visionaries and old pros who built the Nasdaq. He is less good at trawling through the endless, essentially repetitive days in court or goggling at the silken skills of David Boies, the lawyer Justice hired before Al Gore hung his first chad.   The war of the suits (crisp, dark and expensive for Microsoft, crumpled blue for Boies) is trivial. So is the technological ignorance Boies and Judge Jackson share. The meat here is not legal, except in the way the law trails in the wake of pounding reality, but more philosophical. Auletta does not begin to explain the enigma called Bill Gates, to   balance out the spoilt child, the crass politician and the driven business tycoon. Nor does he put his finger on the chemistry that underpins Microsoft and may now drain away.   A tragedy? Certainly, because a cannier chief executive would have sued for peace early on and got it. But would that brighter boss have created Microsoft to begin with? We have not reached the end of this saga. The courts - as in Florida - never end. The judges - as in Florida - change, and so do the political masters. There must be a second edition called  World War 3.5 in the works. Meanwhile, Auletta has written more than a thriller of the new media frontier. He has, however patchily, pushed thinking about it to the outer limits.