Democracy in Europe<br />Larry Seidentop<br />Allen Lane £18.99, pp272<br />Buy it at BOL A thrilling, compulsively readable book about constitutional reform in the European Union? Come on, you must be joking. Yet that is exactly what Larry Siedentop provides. Compulsive, because brisk, erudite and full of intellectual fireworks. Thrilling, because he manages to recast the entire European debate, as endlessly rehearsed in slogans and mundane mumblings, and set it in a fresh context. He begins with what he knows best - the constitution James Madison and Alexander Hamilton wrote for the real federal superstate one hot Philadelphia summer 213 years ago. And from that perspective, the US experience, he asks deadly questions about the building of modern Europe.  Let's assume that the project is, in fact, about creating a vast federal state, because of the need for peace in this most ancient war zone; that the single market is crucial if you seek to be a big player in a multinational world. None of this, says Siedentop tartly, has any relevance to how that federation can be made to work in cohesive democracy. The confusion of means and ends is complete and potentially fatal. Where, after Adenauer, Spaak and Monnet, are the statesmen of vision who think about what they're creating? We are, alas, in the hands of bricklayers, not master builders.   Siedentop does not fear federalism, properly interpreted; indeed, balanced by a written constitution, a senate and other advances, it may be the only way forward for a fiendishly complex union which needs the diversity of its regions   to find any human viability, government by consent. What he does fear is the Brussels of today, growing almost heedlessly as an extension of French centralism, a top-down bureaucracy which, in the end, must stifle consent.   The French (in his carefully constructed thesis) are the movers and shakers of the Europe we have. Their centralising &eacute;lite was there at the heart of its construction, cajoling along a sheepish Germany; now, propelled by new apprehensions after the Wall came down, it is on the march again. What else is the euro and monetary union but the price that Paris exacted from Bonn for allowing German reunification? What else is the Stability Pact but a French gambit to muster a Mediterranean bloc to counterbalance Berlin, the Hague and Vienna? Why is the next European central banker a Frenchman? French nationalism does not quiver over political integration because it makes the rest of Europe more like France.   This isn't another Euro-treatise full of ghosts and villains. It is infinitely more subtle, an examination of frailties rather than a polemic. In spite of all its anxieties about the shape of Brussels to come, it contains nothing of cheer for William Hague. Siedentop is concerned with the quality of democracy, which must underpin any kind of democratic Europe. Britain, he concludes greyly, has nothing of such quality that can currently be exported across the Channel.   What made Britain an example to the world through the centuries was not its horror of written constitutions, but the   natural balance of institutions - local government, the Church, unions, aristocracy - that curbed an overweening centre. That vanished with the old class system. Thatcher read the last rites for our social liberalism when she discovered market liberalism. In her world, and the world that followed, the law of the markets is absolute. If an economy works then, supposedly, everything works.   But even before the WI started heckling, we could see how false that is. People need a sense of identification as citizens, not just consumers. They'll need it more than ever in tomorrow's greater Europe of many surviving cultures and languages. Siedentop doesn't seek to suspend market forces, merely to say they are not enough; not a system of governance or a way of committed life.   Britain, before the stirrings of devolution, was out of this game. Prating about diminished 'national sovereignty' is not enough. France has discovered decentralisation, but late in the day. Germany's existing, slightly inert federalism makes it more of a bystander than a player. So what is this ever-expanding union? How will it find its constitutional peace in a time when constitutional change is, supposedly, the scorned preserve of the chattering, discredited classes? What would Madison and Hamilton have made of this pretty pass?   In short, Siedentop, a lecturer in political thought at Gordon Brown's unfavourite university, shifts far beyond the narrow trenches of national fear and asks, in the voice of a dispassionate outsider, what are we playing at? What is this project that even the French &eacute;lite cannot explain to its masses for fear of irking the Germans? A secret vision is no vision at all. This is a book for every chancellery across our continent.