So to the land of the real north-south divide, where the border is real rather than metaphorical and what's at stake are not house prices but life and death. For in Ireland the killing has returned - though now it wears a different face. It is no longer a struggle between two sides fighting to erase or preserve that border between north and south. The new Troubles are troubles within - loyalists killing loyalists. One gang attacked the other's parade on Saturday and the familiar revenge tragedy began in earnest: tit for tat, this life for that one, your eye for mine. The combatants are loyalist factions whose names form an alphabet soup of fratricidal rivalry: the UDA and UFF, backed by the UDP, on one side; and the UVF, backed by the PUP, on the other. It could be an Ulster production of Monty Python's Life of Brian - with the People's Front of Judea at daggers' drawn with the Judean People's Front. It could be, except two men were left dead on Monday, and four others have been killed in loyalist feuding these last few months - so no one is laughing.  What should those who wish only peace for Northern Ireland - and who had half thought we'd got there - think now? Is this a threat to the peace process or is it internal housekeeping, the equivalent of a mafia war where hoods rub out hoods but "civilians" are in no danger?  The quick and reassuring answer is that the latest round of violence is an internal matter. It represents a battle for supremacy in the Shankill estate, with the Ulster Freedom Fighters' Johnny "Mad Dog" Adair, only recently released from the Maze prison, bidding for turf and power: Mad Dog wants to be top dog. Those on the ground are in little doubt that he is fomenting the current trouble: he wants to be the lord of the Shankill.  There is something reassuring about this view. The men may be brutal, their terrain may be benighted, but it seems safely distant from the peace process. After all, and in true Monty Python style, no one can name a doctrinal difference that separates Adair's UFF from the Ulster Volunteer Force which it hates so bloodily. It is not as if they are fighting over the details of the Good Friday agreement. On the contrary, the political wings of both paramilitary organisations were committed to the agreement earlier and with more enthusiasm than David Trimble's officially more moderate Ulster Unionist party.  Still, though it may be comforting to see the current bloodletting as a Belfast episode of the Sopranos, it might also be a mistake. For there is danger here for Northern Ireland's fragile peace.  For one thing, even though Adair may look like a gangland thug he is not without politics. Under his watch, the UFF and its allies in the Ulster Defence Association have cosied up to the ultra-hardline Loyalist Volunteer Force. Unlike the other organisations, the LVF was never a serious partner in the peace process: it is a rejectionist outfit whose creed was horrific violence. If Adair is taking a movement that was once inside the peace tent and moving it outside, then that is a cause for real alarm.  The current violence could derail the peace process in a more direct way. "The traditional way these things end is by killing some taigs," says one watchful republican. He worries that loyalist internecine feuding rarely stays internecine for long: eventually they murder Catholics, if only to assert their status as the chief defenders of their community. Belfast's Catholics will be locking their doors more tightly tonight.  But there is a deeper challenge the men of loyalist violence pose to the accord. For what they have exposed are the places where the politicians failed.  Start with the opponents of Good Friday. What the last few days prove is that Unionism's hardliners, along with their allies on the British right, were looking in the wrong direction all along. Throughout the 1990s they were obsessed with the IRA; they rarely made a squeak about the armed men of loyalism.  They ignored the fact that the most vicious crimes of the Troubles were often committed by men pledging allegiance to the Union flag: witness the 1970s killing spree of the Shankill Butchers. British security sources privately admit that, while they faced in the IRA a disciplined organisation all but run like an army, they often confronted in loyalism men who seemed driven less by politics than psychopathy (or the racketeering pursuit of personal profit).  The rejectionists may also have been looking the wrong way when they chose their ground for opposition. The deal-breaker for them was always decommissioning - usually of republican weapons. John Hume kept on saying that disarmament was a red herring: you could give up guns on Monday only to buy new ones on Tuesday. Others quietly warned that the bitterest pill would be the release of prisoners - not just republican killers like those behind the 1984 Brighton bomb, but also the likes of Mad Dog Adair. Yet there was only room in the rejectionists' quiver for one arrow, and they aimed it at guns rather than at the men who might wield them.  But it is not just the naysayers who made mistakes. The British and Irish governments can also be faulted for failing to give sufficient support to the leaders who sought to turn the Shankill away from killing and toward politics. Men like the UDP's Gary McMichael and the ultra-impressive David Ervine of the PUP had their work cut out. At least Sinn Fein had a tradition of political republicanism to draw on; McMichael and Ervine were seeking to turn around movements whose entire existence had been dedicated to sectarian violence. The result is that McMichael is fast being eclipsed; he has too little muscle to wrestle the Mad Dog, let alone call him to heel.   The peacemakers of loyalism needed some help if they were to take on both their hardmen and their history. Theirs is a society where the language of gradualism and compromise has little appeal; their constituency is the loyalist male who feels left behind by the new economy of Northern Ireland and who misses the old tribal certainties.The politicians can only promise slow, hard answers, while Mad Dog and his gang offer something shorter and sharper.  What to do now? One quick remedy is to put Johnny Adair back where he belongs: behind bars. Like all the released prisoners, he was let out on condition. Now that he is failing to comply with the new dispensation, his licence should be withdrawn. He may have made some pro-peace noises when he was in jail but he did that because he wanted to get out: he talked the talk so he could walk the walk.   After that, the peacemakers need to help each other - today it's the beleaguered leaders of political loyalism, tomorrow it might be moderate republicans. They can start by boasting of their achievements. Just yesterday, while troops were back on the streets of Belfast, a trade mission arrived from Northern Ireland in Boston. It was led by the Ulster Unionist minister for trade and investment, Reg Empey, and included members of all the province's parties - including Sinn Fein's Pat Doherty, whose links to the IRA are close. Once such a shared mission would have been unimaginable; today it is becoming routine. While the thugs of the Shankill murder each other, the rest of Northern Ireland's people need to remember how far they have come - and to keep their eyes on the prize.