Happy Birthday dear William, happy birthday to you! I know, I know - today is going to be a frightful bore, what with all that revision for the history of art exam tomorrow - but I just thought I'd sneak in a quick "many happy returns" for your big day.   No, don't worry. I'm not going to wade through all that tedious "Wills comes of age" stuff the papers have been dumping on us for the past three weeks. Talk about Yawnsville! I couldn't care less about your Groovy Baby, union jack waistcoat; I'm not bothered whether you are a dab hand with a chicken paella or have been groping a triple-barrelled deb on John Latsis's yacht. I don't care.  That's not because you're not important. You are. Whether we like it or not, you are predestined to be the head of state of the country I and 60 million others live in. While you're at it, you'll be the titular head of Canada, New Zealand and Australia - as well as a string of other, smaller nations dotted all over the globe. You matter a lot.  Some people will say (though not to your face), that your powers will be purely "ceremonial". Don't believe a word of it. Talk to your granny instead: she'll set you right. She's understood for nearly half a century that she occupies a central place in the British constitution. In a deadlocked situation, she gets to choose which party leader should be given first shot at forming a government - or even to call fresh elections. She signs the bills which become our laws. Don't be fooled, William. We still live in a land ruled by crown prerogative, with vast authority concentrated at the very top.  There's another word to watch out for, besides ceremonial. Defenders of your birthright will use it often. The monarchy no longer matters, they'll say: it's only  symbolic.  They're half right. Right that it's symbolic - wrong that it's "only". As I suspect you already know, symbols matter, especially to a nation. They tell the rest of the world - and ourselves - who we think we are. Just look at the fuss we made last night of the England football team. The head of state is like that writ large: a person who serves as the living embodiment of our values, our traditions and our ideals. It's a big job. No "only" about it.  So how come I don't care whether you're exchanging raunchy emails with Britney Spears or adolescent phero-mones with Isabella Anstruther-Gough-Calthorpe, the gel from a family so good they named it thrice? I don't care because it's not fair - to us or to you.   Take us first. I think it diminishes us a nation that we can make a national event out of a few snaps of an 18-year-old boy, even one as photogenic as you. I think it makes us smaller as a people to read 30 bland questions and 30 blander answers from a young man who has done precisely nothing. To publish these across 12 Daily Mail pages, including long analyses decoding the hidden meaning of responses such as "I don't know" or "I haven't really thought about it" is a kind of national humiliation.  It's not you, I promise. It's equally belittling that TV newsreaders wear solemn faces and give fat minutes of airtime to announce that the Queen met Camilla, as they did at the start of the month. What would that look like to a visitor from abroad? What kind of tinpot, chocolate-soldier Ruritania is it that makes room on an evening news bulletin for a tale which belongs in the Eurotrash pages of Hola! magazine? It makes Britain little better than a wet-weather Monaco.  So I don't like what it does to us. But I don't think it does much good to you either. "I don't like the attention," you said in one of the few full answers supplied to that questionnaire at the weekend. "I feel uncomfortable with it." I bet you do. For we, through the media we all keep in business, have already made your adolescence pretty freakish and are well on the way to making your adult life a high-octane, plushly lined observation tank.  Most kids are allowed to grow up and make their mistakes with the teasing of family and friends the only sanction. You have no such freedom. You can't be snapped with a glass in hand, lest you look like a lush. You can't dye your hair or pierce an ear without setting off a national debate. Even before you turned 18, the broadsheet newspapers speculated over whether you had lost your virginity. And when. And where.   You are the one school leaver in Britain who can never take advantage of New Labour's rhetoric of "opportunity for all". When Gordon Brown goes on about creating a society where young people can be whatever they want to be, you should plug your ears - because it doesn't apply to you. Just as a century ago the son of a miner had no choice - he had to become a miner - so you, too have no choice. Never mind your talents or dreams, they will all come to nought. Your course has been set. You will be our head of state; you have no say.  I admit it, this is a new line for us republicans. For centuries the very word has evoked images of Jacobin execution squads, hooded men plotting to place you and your kin at the mercy of the guillotine. Even in your own, brief lifetime republicans have seemed, if not thirsty for blue blood, then at least unbothered by the plight of your family. Throughout the 90s, anti-monarchists too often came across as resentful green-eyes who wished ill fortune on an already blighted dynasty.   It doesn't have to be that way. There is no contradiction between a desire to fill Britain's ultimate job by democratic means and an empathy for the family who've been saddled with it for the best part of a millennium - your family. On the contrary, there is a connection between the two. For democrats can reach out to the doubters and defenders of monarchy by making a new case: call it pro-Windsor republicanism.  We could say that your grandmother is a good woman who's done an impossible job - and that we have no business asking her family to do it any longer. We could wish her a long and healthy life and promise that, when the time comes, we will give her a full state funeral, with all the honours. But we could also promise, at that same moment, to bury this fairytale institution   with her. Not just for our sake, but for all of you. You know first-hand, from the tragic fate of your parents, what cost this constant, inherited demand exacts. The prying, invasive interest in you is already growing. It destroyed your mother: you must fear what it will do to you.  I should let you go; you have an exam to prepare for. But today you turn 18; you join an age group which is more republican than any other. If you meet the untitled among your peers, as well as the Davinas and the Zaras, you'll hear more of this kind of talk. Think on it. To wish the end of the monarchy is not to wish the end of your family - but rather a new beginning. Good luck, William - and happy birthday.