This was the moment everyone had feared. From its first faltering steps more than five years ago, the quest for peace in Northern Ireland has hinged on a single fact: the Irish Republican Army's ceasefire.Without that, there would have been nothing - no Good Friday agreement, no overwhelming majorities in referendums north and south, no assembly and, above all, none of that exhilarating sense of possibility, that hint of imminent normality, which has filled the province since the bombs stopped.When the first ceasefire was broken, with the 1996 blast at Canary Wharf, all that hope drained away in an instant. Last night brought a similar moment of dread: the IRA announced its withdrawal from the disarmament talks on which the entire peace process now hangs. The heart began to sink. Could it be that Northern Ireland, having come so close to a peaceful future, was about to return to the bloody past of bombs, shootings and death? No, thankfully, it seemed not. The interpreters who routinely fan out to decode statements from the IRA provided rapid reassurance - in time for the Six O'Clock News: there was, they said, no threat to the ceasefire. The provisionals were not returning to war; instead they were pulling out in disgust from the process that is meant to secure peace. As one senior republican put it, the IRA's latest action is a "controlled upping of the ante". They want the Ulster Unionists and the British government to realise how bad things have got.  What explains this crisis? After all, little more than two months have passed since we all witnessed the once-unimaginable: Martin McGuinness and Bairbre de Bruin taking their seats as Sinn Fein ministers in a new Northern Ireland executive - sharing a cabinet table with their blood-enemies in Unionism. Just a few days ago John de Chastelain, the Canadian former general charged with overseeing the disarmament process, stepped forward to deliver his first truly upbeat report - anticipating, at last, a process of IRA decommissioning. So what went wrong?  The answer, sad to say, may lie with one man: Peter Mandelson. The republican movement is in a state of cold fury with the secretary of state, accusing him of dishonesty and unforgiveable bias - acting not as an honest broker but as an agent for unionism. Relations have not broken down. Nor have they reached the nadir plumbed by Mr Mandelson's predecessor, Mo Mowlam, in her relationship with the unionists. The distrust is not yet that bad. But, says one Sinn Fein activist, "It's getting there."  At the heart of the problem are the events of last Friday. On that day Mandelson announced the suspension of the fledgling Northern Ireland executive. From now on the province would be governed by him alone: a return to the direct rule of the last quarter century. He had no alternative, he said. If he had allowed the executive to survive, the Ulster Unionist leader David Trimble would have faced his party's ruling council the next day and been forced to resign. After all, Trimble had only persuaded the UUP's hardliners to allow the executive on a promise that, if the IRA did not hand over their guns by February 12, he would quit as first minister and bring the whole body tumbling down. In the absence of any movement from the IRA, Mandelson says the only way he could save Trimble - and therefore the executive itself - was to suspend it.  It is that decision which has so enraged Sinn Fein. For they believe the IRA had indeed moved - and moved an enormous distance. Admittedly it was at the last minute, late on Friday afternoon, but there is nothing unusual in that - not in a process which saw the Good Friday agreement negotiated at five o'clock in the morning. The IRA's shift was certainly significant enough to put a rare spring in General de Chastelain's step, after hours of intensive work. Dublin and Washington regarded it as a huge breakthrough, too. For what was in the pipeline was a statement declaring an end to the war, a promise for a symbolic yielding of arms before the May deadline agreed on Good Friday and even a possible timetable for decommissioning, dependent on an equivalent move toward demilitarisation by the British government. The critical element for the provos was a national day of reconciliation, one in which they could be seen not as a defeated force but as an army "standing down" along with the British.   With all that in the air, it's easy to understand republican fury. Why on earth would Peter Mandelson have passed up this chance, just to stick to a deadline laid down by the Ulster Unionist Council? For Sinn Fein's president, Gerry Adams, it made life particularly difficult. At the end of last year he faced a grilling from republican hardliners who doubted Mandelson's bona fides. They feared the secretary of state had issued wavering unionists with a personal assurance that he would collapse the executive if the IRA gave up no guns, no matter what the Good Friday text said. When they heard Mandelson on the radio, explaining why unionist patience had finally snapped, they felt their worst fears had been confirmed - that they were dealing not with a British cabinet minister but a spokesman for the UUP.   Their fury was stoked yet further by their belief that Mandelson is massaging the truth. He insists that he had no idea what was in the IRA statement when he ordered the suspension on Friday night. Sinn Fein say that is absolutely untrue. As secretary of state, he is kept informed of every step of these ultra-delicate negotiations. They are convinced that he sacrificed a real chance for peace last week - in order to stick to his bargain with David Trimble.  That may be a conspiracy theory too far, but Peter Mandelson does indeed seem to have snatched defeat from the jaws of victory. His error has been to give the distinct impression - so fatal in a Northern Ireland secretary - that the ultimate veto remains in unionist hands: if events don't run on their timetable, they don't run at all. He has not paused to imagine what his actions on Friday night looked like to nationalist and republican eyes. For they   seemed to confirm the hardliners' constant complaint: that no matter how much you bend over backwards, no matter how much you negotiate, it will never be good enough. Adams and McGuinness have spent years arguing with their fellow republicans that politics is worthwhile, that gaining a power-sharing executive was worth trading, say, articles 2 and 3 of the Irish constitution, which maintained a claim on the north and which have now been dropped. Then, on Friday, a British minister removes the executive with a stroke of a pen just because the unionists insist he must.  No wonder the hardliners are walking away. Peter Mandelson has succeeded in making the moderates in republicanism look like saps and the extremists like sages. He needs to move quickly to turn that around - for a peace process that remains deadlocked for too long can fast become a war.