Are the politicians of Northern Ireland turning into drama queens? Are they becoming so hooked on the adrenaline rush of the major event that they cannot get by without another fix? If it's not Bill Clinton visiting Omagh, it's Bono at the Waterfront Hall; if it's not an encounter with Nelson Mandela, it's a Nobel peace prize for David Trimble and John Hume. These days the politicos of Ulster need a dose of stardom and spectacle to get them going. Luckily, yesterday provided just such a fix. The Queen decided to bestow the nation's highest civilian honour on the Royal Ulster Constabulary, making it the first collective recipient of the George Cross since Malta was singled out for its bravery in 1942. The sheer rarity of the award ensured it had just the kind of out-of-the-ordinary drama Northern Ireland needs to sit up and listen. Judged by that standard, the elevation of Northern Ireland's police force into the RUC, GC, has already proved a success: it has grabbed the attention of a society which has seen it all. Who should get the credit? Can it be the Queen, who hands out the medal named after her father? Somehow one doubts Her Majesty would make such a sensitive move, not when Northern Ireland is on the brink of a new settlement. No, it must be someone else.  "The panache, the professionalism," gushes one senior unionist. "It has to be Mandelson." Of course! Who but Peter Mandelson, the sorcerer of spin, the magician of the media stunt and the recently-installed secretary of state for Northern Ireland, would have dreamed up such a marvellous wheeze? This gesture has Mandy written all over it, from the showbiz value of a headline-grabbing decoration to the politics that clearly lay behind it.  At first glance, it looks like a smart move. As more than one unionist whispered yesterday, "This is Prods' week" - this is the time when unionists can demand all the tender loving care they want, including a prize for the police force they regard as their own. On Saturday the 860-odd members of the Ulster Unionist party's ruling council gather to ponder David Trimble's latest negotiation of the Good Friday agreement. He will ask them to approve his "sequenced" series of steps establishing a new executive for Northern Ireland - with two places allocated for Sinn Fein - on a promise that some IRA guns will follow shortly afterwards.  Trimble could not get the unanimous support of his closest colleagues for this deal, so now he's going over their heads - gambling that the activists will endorse him where his party in the Northern Ireland assembly would not. It's a high-risk game, and now Mandelson has tried to improve the odds. A gong for the RUC is meant to keep the Unionist mood music sweet at least until all the votes are counted on Saturday. Insiders reckon the votes are stacking Trimble's way. "He'll skate through," said one.  The Mandy move has another, longer-range target: Chris Patten's plan to reform the RUC. Unionists regard that document as treachery,   not so much in its substantive proposals - most of which they can live with - but in the symbolic changes it demands. Patten wants the RUC's name and badge to change, along with a promise to stop flying the union flag over RUC police stations.  He wants to de-unionise the force - an idea unionists can't stomach, seeing it as a betrayal of all the good men who have served and fallen wearing the RUC's bottle-green uniform, protecting protestant communities from the terrorist threat. The George Cross is meant to sweeten the Patten pill, by showing that London does indeed value the sacrifice the force has made these last three decades.  Better still, this is a gesture which seems to cost little in nationalist opposition. Yesterday Sinn Fein issued a fairly tame condemnation of the award to the RUC. As one activist explained it, most republicans regard the medal as little more than a gift from one institution of the British establishment to another - from the Crown to the RUC - neither of which is particularly trusted: "What really gets people angry is when one of our own takes one of their honours". He's thinking of the former nationalist leader, Gerry Fitt, sitting in the House of Lords. A GC for   the RUC is OK, because it's essentially a British affair.  So perhaps Mandy's little brainwave will be a low-cost boost to the peace process, allowing the next few jumps to be made more comfortably. But the politics of Northern Ireland rarely run that smoothly. Instead, there are definite risks.  First, the Ulster unionists may not be so easily seduced. The very blatancy of the sweetener may reduce its power: unionists like to think of themselves as "hard-headed and unbribeable" says one of their number, and that may make them pocket Mandelson's gift, only to forget about it instantly. Second, the George Cross may strike plenty of Ulster protestants the way it hit the loyalist politician Gary McMichael, who feared the medal might be a glorified "retirement watch".  There is indeed something valedictory about giving a police force such an award, as if the British empire is thanking its colonial constabulary for its long service - and then preparing to bid it farewell. This may be Mandelson's way of sending the RUC a P45 - in a perfumed envelope. That is why the mildness of Sinn Fein's remarks yesterday sent a chill down many a unionist spine: perhaps republicans are not worried, fear the UUP crowd, because they know what's coming next is going to favour them.  But this caluclation may be too optimistic. Given the long rap sheet republicans hold out against the RUC - from the shoot-to-kill policy uncovered by John Stalker in the   mid-1980s to the alleged collusion with loyalist paramilitaries in the murders of Pat Finucane, Robert Hamill and, most recently, Rosemary Nelson - it may be too much to ask even moderate Catholics to accept the Royal Ulster Constabulary as national heroes of valour. It is not only David Trimble who has hardliners to worry about. Gerry Adams has fundamentalists, too: he will face them today when Sinn Fein's executive meets in Dublin. He is being stretched just now, forced to promise that yesterday's GC will be cancelled out by the Patten reforms when they come. That puts the Sinn Fein leadership in a very awkward position: dependent on the actions of the British government for its own survival.  All told, it leaves an uncomfortable feeling. Yesterday's gesture had panache all right - but it may well have been just a bit too clever, a bit too flashy for the ultra-sensitive ecology of Northern Ireland. One player muttered that it was a bit too New Labour: great television, but full of implications that had not been thought through. Tony Blair made the same mistake with his hand-written pledges on decommissioning during the referendum campaign. So did Peter Mandelson in his Commons appearance on Monday, where he appeared to stray beyond the letter of what had been agreed under George Mitchell. Labour need to be careful: in their enthusiasm to make peace happen, they need to avoid the flashes which can spell danger.