George Mitchell is a master of boredom. The former US senator and chairman of the Northern Ireland peace talks is almost Zen-like in his ability to endure tedium. He can listen for hours to the most detailed minutiae and hair-splitting without feeling the urge to fidget wildly, make paper aeroplanes or scream with frustration. Apparently the chairman employs the same rule he used when he served as majority leader of the US senate: no need for relevance. Instead Mitchell lets people say whatever they want for as long as they like. That way, he reasons, everything is on the table. Nothing festers underneath, because nothing is left unsaid. Whether Mitchell's strategy of boredom is a masterstroke or a mistake we should know in the next few days - or even sooner. For the chairman is in the closing stages of a review that will determine whether a peace deal can finally be done or whether the Good Friday agreement - one of the greatest diplomatic triumphs of modern times - collapses in failure.  The mood music has rarely been better. Both sides say there has been remarkable progress, some daring to hint that a deal is in sight. A rumour buzzed around Belfast at the weekend suggesting that the IRA was preparing to give up some weapons, thereby breaking the decommissioning deadlock which has   gripped the peace process for 18 months. Others note the 90 minutes of "facetime" granted to Mitchell by President Clinton last week. That meeting would not have happened unless the talks chairman had some good news to impart. Likewise, Mitchell's sessions with Tony Blair and the Irish prime minister, Bertie Ahern. As if to symbolise the new mood, the American hosted an unprecedented Sunday lunch in his hotel suite, watching as unionist leader David Trimble broke bread with Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness of Sinn Fein. "That's a Rubicon in itself," remarked one insider, close to the talks. Once Trimble has passed Adams the mustard, and Trimble has Adams with spinach in his teeth it will be hard to go back to the days of hate.  Of course, there have been moments of optimism before. A deal seemed imminent in July, when Northern Ireland was due to establish its own power-sharing executive - and get a taste of the devolution already extended to Scotland and Northern Ireland. That fell when the IRA weapons the unionists had demanded never materialised. "No guns, no government," was the unionist slogan and they stuck to it. But this time, both sides are daring to hope.  If this really is the breakthrough moment, then who is responsible? What has happened to make optimism fashionable again? First credit should go to Mitchell himself. Not only to his near-Buddhist patience, but also to his incrementalist style. Throwing a media blackout over the whole process, he has forced the players not to grandstand in public but to talk to each other in private. In that same, low-key vein, Mitchell has pushed for baby-steps which each side can take in a carefully choreographed sequence. "It's a series of small hurdles rather than one big Beecher's Brook," says the insider. The   idea is for each side to make a move which is sufficiently modest not to inflame its own hardliners - and for that move to be instantly rewarded with a response from the other side. So, hypothetically, the IRA could appoint an interlocutor to the decommissioning body headed by the Canadian general John De Chastelain - a figure everyone agrees will be crucial in the new arrangement. Trimble might then respond by establishing a shadow version of the Northern Ireland executive. De Chastelain could then report progress on disarmament. The executive could then "go live." On it could go, step by step, with no single moment when the process was clearly over. The war in Northern Ireland would not end with a bang, but a series of small fizzles - but it would be over.   The next slab of credit will have to be shared, appropriately enough, between the two enemies themselves. As a matter of political reality, that means Sinn Fein and the Ulster Unionists. John Hume's SDLP may be the largest nationalist party, but it is Sinn Fein - thanks to its relationship with the IRA - which has mattered since Good Friday. It seemed to make its "seismic shift," as Tony Blair described it, back in July when it first signalled some IRA flexibility on disarmament. That was rewarded with inaction on the unionist side - who remained unconvinced - leaving Adams and McGuinness badly undermined in the eyes of their own supporters. But they have since climbed out of that hole - so that senior republicans speak confidently of "no going back" from the political, non-violent route charted for most of the 1990s. Even decommissioning can be made acceptable to the old guard, says one republican, by placing it in the   sweep of IRA history - reminding the foot soldiers of the previous IRA hand- overs of 1921 and, with slightly less enthusiasm, 1962.  Lastly there stands David Trimble, who will remain as much an enigma to future historians as he is to those who observe him right now. He goes in for none of the stirring rhetoric and big talk of the world's other great peacemakers. Not for him the poetry or emotion of an FW de Klerk or a Yitzhak Rabin. While they talked of a personal transformation, of making the long journey from hawk to dove, Trimble proudly insists he has made no movement at all.  Yet he fails to give himself credit where it is due. For the unionist leader now talks directly to the man he once reviled as a blood enemy. He does not talk through the chair, but to Gerry Adams' face. Inch by inch, and with a minimum of statesman-like oratory, Trimble has moved his community to the point where a deal is possible. He has not taken a great leap of faith - things stalled in July because he was not prepared to accept Sinn Fein's word on decommissioning - but has waited instead for concrete proofs. He has relied on unglamorous skills like stubbornness and discipline. He has been firm with his own people, acting like an old-fashioned politician, carving out his enemies in the Westminster party but carrying the unionist faction in the assembly with him. It has not been a pretty sight; Trimble has lacked the Hollywood panache of Rabin/Arafat or De Klerk/Mandela. But it may, at last, be about to bring results. And if that one day makes Northern Ireland a place so peaceful and boring that even George Mitchell can't stand it - then Trimble, along with Adams and the former senator himself, will deserve Ulster's everlasting thanks.