You read it here first. In fact, you read it here first, second and third. Guardian readers have been bombarded with this idea for well over a year now, patiently drumming their fingers as I've banged on about the urgent need to honour the founding principles of America and to build a republic of our own in Britain. Some of you have told me to keep up the good work, others have pleaded with me to give it a rest - but for a year this has remained an internal discussion, a spirited debate among us Guardian folk, with the occasional incursion from our liberal con- freres on the Observer or New Statesman. Now that's changed. In what I know is the dream of every first-time author, the book I wrote calling for a democratic transformation of Britain has suddenly been seized upon by the rest of the press - with attention greatest among the rightwing newspapers where most liberals and republicans fear to tread. The debate has raged on the opinion pages of the Sun, Mail and Telegraph, as those papers have thrown open their letters columns and feature slots to boiled-down summaries of my idea -and boiling-fury denunciations of it.  I've been been dismissed as "this wretched man Friedland [sic]," by Auberon Waugh in the Telegraph and lambasted as one of "a bunch of middle-class (if they worked with their hands they'd die of exhaustion) redbrick-schooled, semi-educated pseudo- intellectuals of the New Labour fanaticism," by Frederick Forsyth in yesterday's Mail. My book, Bring Home The Revolution, has been the subject of the Sun Says editorial column twice in five days - with one of the paper's trademark "you the jury" telephone polls to go with it. Yesterday they ran a cartoon of the Queen, kitted out as the Statue of Liberty, trading her crown for the Lady's diadem and clutching a copy of my book. One media pundit was on the phone last night, asking how I had managed to turn what should have been a dusty tome for the wonk set into a cause c&eacute;l&egrave;bre for the mass-circulation press.  The answer is: I have no idea. It would be nice to think this belated flurry of interest came from conservative commentators who found some pearl of sparkling writing or penetrating logic in my book and could keep quiet no longer. That would be nice; but I don't think it's true. Instead, I suspect something else is at work - something for which I can claim no credit and which is far more interesting than either me or my book. I think it might say something   about the rightwing press, and may even hint at an exciting shift in the country itself.  Part of it is the simple rhythm of journalism. The Australians are voting on whether or not to become a republic on Saturday and British papers are keen to find the local angle. But it goes a bit deeper than that. The Sun has not been content merely to act as neutral ringmaster. On the contrary, it has used my book to make a point of its own - edging ever closer to declaring against the monarchy. "We often kid ourselves that British democracy is the best in the world," began the editorial. "The truth is, we have one of the oldest democracies in the world - and it shows." The Sun did not explicitly call for a republic but it was pretty clear where the paper's sympathy lay. Perhaps the Sun is using Bring Home The Revolution to dip its toe into the republican water we know its owner, Rupert Murdoch, swims in himself. Perhaps I have spent the last week being that toe. Beyond the media, however, there are signs that this brief burst of attention is part of a larger change. First, the Australian referendum, last week's removal of the hereditary peers and the current row over the political interventions of Prince Charles have all combined to create what feels like the first republican moment since the death of the Princess of Wales.  Just two weeks earlier, in August 1997, a Guardian/ICM poll showed that - for the first time - a majority thought Britain would be no worse off if we got rid of the monarchy. Republican sentiment surged yet further in the fervid aftermath of the princess's death, but it subsided in the two years that followed. The Windsors regrouped and the daily reminder of their limitations - Diana herself - was gone.   Now that two-year lull appears to be at an end. Thanks to the Australians, we are debating the subject once more. Thanks to the hereditaries, we have suddenly gained a surge of confidence: we have seen that position-by-birthright is not a fact of nature, but can be challenged and even abolished. Yesterday Talk Radio reported "a seismic shift" among its listeners, as more than 1,000 calls flooded its switchboard, with republican support leaping from the usual 30% mark to nearly 50%. The change in the House of Lords has shown that heredity need not last forever: things can change.  There is another way to understand the unexpected interest from the right. For what got this media snowball rolling was a story 10 days ago in the Sunday Times, describing Bring Home The Revolution as the book of the hour in New Labour circles: it said that Tony Blair and Gordon Brown had both read it and even quoted Jack Straw praising its "observations". Somehow I doubt the cabinet is staying awake at night, thumbing through my monograph, but the very idea seems to have driven the Waugh-Forsyth set crazy.   For ever since Blair's denunciation of "the forces of conservatism" the right have become convinced that the prime minister is not the cuddly centrist they hoped for, but a dangerous radical bent on defeating them and everything they stand for. The trouble is, they have never known quite what Blair's evil plan is. Now they think they have found it - by branding my book as "the New Labour bible". Forsyth reads it as a conspiracy to destroy every institution that is uniquely British, thereby removing the only obstacles that stand in the way of Blair's true ambition: a Hitlerite dictatorship and total surrender to a German-dominated Europe. Never mind that that sounds a little contradictory, or that it's a misreading of both my book and Tony Blair: since Bournemouth, the "forces of conservativism" are convinced they are in a war with Labour, not just an argument about details. They have wanted to see   the big picture, to know Blair's true war aims, and now they think they have glimpsed them. It's all nonsense, of course, but that hasn't deterred them.  Still, I'm encouraged by the whole thing - and not just because people are at last debating a book that was meant to be debated. I am heartened by the fact that the Sun is endorsing a Guardian writer's call for basic democratic change - including a written constitution - when years ago such a thought would have seemed pure fantasy. It says to me that the old labels of left and right are losing their meaning, that a coalition is taking shape, drawn from both sides and including the most unexpected allies - me and the folks from the Sun, suddenly comrades together, pushing for a new republic.