The chancellor giveth and the chancellor taketh away, very like God. While many good plans unfold with money ear-marked for innovative local projects, the solid core of social services is falling apart. The services have a habit of crying wolf, but this time the wolf is through the door and devouring services for children and the old. Money may be flowing into schools and hospitals, but it is flowing out of social services, with councils now making steep cuts and closures all round the country.  Public attention alights briefly on tragedies such as that of Victoria Climbi, but otherwise social services are the forgotten army: they can be cut to ribbons with no one noticing the dangerous consequences. Services for the poor and frail are not news, while minor defects in services for the middle classes are hot politics. So the NHS got a sudden extra £1bn this year, while social services got nothing.   Here is an example of the result: Pen Green in Corby, Northampton, is a model family centre. In one of the poorest wards in Britain, 600 families a day come here for a round-the-clock creche for shift workers, nursery education, health, parenting help and home visits all combined with adult education. Scores of groups meet here, an ideal social hub for a community with little else. It is such a famously good model that its founder, Dr Margy Whalley OBE, trained 5,000 early childhood educators here last year. Ofsted and the audit commission found Pen Green "excellent" and "outstanding", bringing together everything children and parents need under one welcoming roof.   Margaret Hodge, the previous early years minister, fought hard with the Treasury to build 9,000 new neighbourhood nurseries. She would take officials, journalists and anyone she could to Pen Green to persuade them what could be done: only this week the centre received more government funding to provide training for the whole region. But also this week it received notice from Northampton County Council that its core funding is being cut by half: two-thirds of its 78 staff would have to go by April. That is how the madness goes, giving and taking away at the same time.   The government has a strategy to provide childcare in poor areas so that women can work. It has a Sure Start poverty policy designed to rescue vulnerable children at birth so they have less need for help later in life. Yet local authorities are closing or cutting family centres all over the country, in Lancashire, Leicester, Gloucester, Stockport, Ealing and other places. This partly explains the alarming statistics produced by IPPR: despite much more direct government money for childcare since 1997, the total number of day care places has so far hardly risen: there are more day nurseries but fewer child-minders and play groups. The main success has been more after-school clubs for older children.   The Pen Green cut is just one example of the deep crisis in social services. The government's standard spending assessment (SSA) allocates money to local social services, but grossly underestimates their true costs. As a result social services departments are already spending £1bn more than the SSA pays out, to be found from other council departments instead. Demand rises as the frail old live longer and nursing home fees are now £100 more a week than is allowed for in government grants. Under Labour, three times more social services money arrives ring-fenced for government schemes: they may be excellent projects but the money is not available for underfunded basic services.   The government has rightly demanded much higher standards for children in care, but has not paid extra - while the number of children in care is rising steeply, at phenomenal cost, as more children in danger are being detected. Disability costs are soaring too, as more very premature babies survive permanently damaged. More special needs children live to have a long adulthood, no longer carelessly warehoused (on the NHS budget) in cheap big hospitals. Some cash comes as a one-off: to avoid a winter NHS crisis, social services got £100m last year to buy care beds for old people who were blocking up hospitals. But who pays the next year for those extra beds?    Social services departments struggling to do the legal minimum are now cutting back their eligibility criteria. That means that an old person who used to get help with shopping and cleaning once or twice a week now gets nothing until she is so frail she needs total care. A family at risk will get nothing until the danger is acute. Cuts in support and prevention lead to more expensive crises later, but now there is only money for crises.   Last week's local government white paper promises to stabilise the ring-fencing culture and give councils more freedom. There is a natural tension between a government that has good social policies and dozens of task forces wanting to implement well-researched programmes, and the autonomy of councils obliged to deliver them. This is not local authority villainy: any council in danger of failing to provide its legal safety-net services is forced to pare back everything else. Family centres and day centres for old people are not essential for survival. No doubt ministerial letters will point out that local authorities got a   generous-sounding 7.4% extra this year. But that was not extra calculated for social services: councils cannot cream off the large new sums designated directly for schools. Meanwhile, nursing home fees have risen by over 17% this year. Ministers might point out (rightly) that some councils manage their money badly, but they also know from their own constituencies that social services are in dire straits because of under-funding.   This all comes back to the same old problem - lack of money in an under-taxed country always trying to make too little go too far. There is a chronic shortage of home helps, carers and social workers in most areas. Trying to employ home helps at the £4.10 an hour minimum wage for visiting, at all hours, incontinent sufferers from Alzheimer's cannot compete with supermarket checkout jobs paying £7 an hour. The hidden army of social services employees are underpaid and unnoticed (until looking for someone to blame).   As for Pen Green, it must be saved. But if it is, that rescue will only mask other cuts and closures. The leader of Northampton Council says he has to close an old people's day centre and four old people's homes. The cost of keeping children in care has shot up: just three extra children needing specialist emergency care cost him £100,000 more this year. Yes, he says, Labour has paid out more since 1999, but new rules for higher standards have not been matched with new money. "We've got a hell of a lot of difficult choices," he says, pondering how high he dare fix his council tax next year.   The government faces exactly the same difficult choices: will it dare raise taxes to pay for a universal service of Pen Green's quality?