A great assemblage of poverty experts gathered around Gordon Brown's breakfast table yesterday to launch a Treasury document that bluntly outlines how much poverty remains. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Chief Rabbi, Catholic, Methodist, Sikh, Hindu and Muslim leaders sat alongside a flotilla of government ministers with the big beasts of the charity world debating what must be done next.  The chancellor was trying to kick-start the End Child Poverty Coalition, a curious umbrella organisation of his own devising. He wants it to act with the force of Jubilee 2000's Drop the Debt campaign to champion the cause of the poor and force him to do more for the poor in the face of the louder competing demands on his purse. He realises the government cannot hit its ambitious zero-poverty target without public support. He has done some good by stealth: the rest will need taxpayers' informed consent for sizeable redistribution over the next 20 years. Can this caucus create a campaign to spark the public imagination?   Around the table the facts in the document were laid out. Some 1.2m children may have been saved from poverty but the next 3.5m will get ever harder to reach. Since the EU poverty measure that Britain uses is (rightly) relative, it is a moving target (60% of median income). That means achieving zero poverty requires a shape of society where incomes are far more equal than now. Using the same measure, Sweden has only 5% poor children, while we, the most unequal society in Europe, have a third. Income equality in Finland means young people with degrees only earn 3% more than those with minimum qualifications: would society accept that here? Scandinavia has shown how more equal distribution does not damage national overall wealth, but enhances it. Meanwhile our top 350 company CEO's paid themselves an average 18% increase last year.   This fledgling post-New Labour era is finding its feet warily. The first tentative step was to float the idea that higher taxes might be needed for the NHS. But these poverty targets will need higher taxes too and a fairer earnings structure. Government handouts have given the bottom fifth of the population an average £1,700 a year extra - the biggest increase ever. But are low-wage employers to be subsidised indefinitely by the munificent chancellor, even while the employers organisations have the gall to snipe at tax credits? At some   point - though no one raised it at this breakfast - bigger questions have to be asked.   The need to top-up wages in so many low-paid jobs shows that wage structures are profoundly dysfunctional. Large numbers of people work in jobs that don't pay enough to live on - jobs that are entirely essential to the standard of living of the rest. In the last 10 years national wealth rose by over 30%, yet the low paid still failed to get enough share of it. One conclusion is not that the state should endlessly top up low earnings until all are lifted out of poverty - but that we pay too little for many of the goods and services on which society relies. If catering wages are too low to live on, we are getting restaurant meals too cheaply. If care workers are paid too little, then we are getting old people looked after at an unrealistic cut price. If office cleaners can't get by on their wages, then we should be paying the real price to get the job done.   Redistribution of wealth is not just something that needs to happen through higher taxes and more government spending: it is something everyone would need to adjust to in their getting and spending habits, paying realistic prices for things we now get too cheaply, reordering pay structures right across society. When the minimum wage was introduced, the Tories opposed it saying it would lose jobs, but it had no such effect. The reason was that most of these jobs are essential. Several cycles of down-turns have left organisations downsized into lean (and very mean) outfits. There is not much slack. Since basic cleaning and caring is essential not optional, someone has to do it: if wages rise, customers will just have to pay up and cut back other spending (often imports or foreign holidays, unlikely to affect jobs).    This radical talk is not heard from government: they twitch at any such suggestion. They want the End Child Poverty Coalition to open these debates. But looking around the table, the coalition's newly appointed director might wonder if this is quite the raw material for a radical public fighting force. The religious leaders were not as strong on the moral failings of a grossly unequal society as they were on the moral causes of poverty, competing with homilies on family breakdown, the importance of marriage and "mothers who keep changing boyfriends". As for the venerable children's charities, many of their leaders have been a long time in their posts, locked in polite and pointless combat with each other for eye-catching fundraising. They guard their political neutrality for fear of alienating donors. Many cherish the sort of respectability that holds high society fundraising balls: will they dare annoy the rich? That is why they tend to highlight child abuse, child prostitution and homelessness rather than fundamental social injustice.    How is the public to be persuaded? Where is the punchy slogan everyone can identify with? There is always public doubt about the deserving and the undeserving poor. In the early days Shelter galvanised concern for poor homeless families - but a roof over a child's head was an easier cause than money in their parents' pockets. At yesterday's press conference of course someone asked how the chancellor knew parents weren't just frittering away extra money for children. This campaign somehow has to transform the British public into Scandinavian social democrats.   You might think that is the job of politicians. It would help if poverty had featured even briefly in the election campaign. But even if they tried harder, it cannot be done by politicians alone: they have neither the trust nor the fresh energy of a Greenpeace. However, there is something the government could do to capture public imagination. They must recast the excellent but incomprehensible plethora of schemes for poor children - Sure Start and many others   - as a universal children's programme. Children's centres in every area, including daycare and baby clinics for all would create a service everyone uses and values like schools and the NHS. The better off would pay, but all would use them and public support for financing them (and the anti-poverty schemes they would also house with less stigma) would be easier to win: mothers high up the income scale are also desperate for nurseries and after-school clubs. Imagine beautiful children's palaces in every neighbourhood: poverty policy would come in from the cold.   The government is walking foggily into a new era. The full implications of its targets on the NHS, child poverty, full employment and education are forcing it in a radical direction. Either it succeeds in persuading voters that these things are worth paying for, or the country falls back into another Tory dark age. The End Child Poverty Coalition had better start sharpening its sword to join this long battle for hearts and minds.