A "taxpayers' revolt" - a lethal phrase that will come in handy for many a rightwing newspaper and Tory frontbench rabble-rouser - warned Peter Mandelson on these pages. The architect of New Labour and modernisation thinks the public are not yet ready for higher taxes. They will have to see real improvement in public services before they will trust the government with more money. But what if there is little chance of real improvement until there is a lot more money for a very long time? (Despite more cash, 40% of NHS trusts forecast deficits this year and next, without improvements.) And if the delicate question of higher taxation cannot be raised now at this most propitious moment, then when?  Curiously, Mandelson's article sounded like a blast from the past, an abrupt reminder of how much has changed. Just 10 short days ago the chancellor made his pre-budget statement - a speech honed word by word late into the night together with the prime minister - and everything changed. Mandelson's New Labour project died, rendered redundant. New Labour meant two new things - financial prudence and no new income tax. (In 1996 Mandelson wanted to pledge not just no income tax, but no tax rises at all for the whole first term - which would have been catastrophic.)   While prudence is now (astoundingly) a dull cliche, the old tax pledge is an obstacle to progress. The New Labour chariot to victory has been retired to the museum of Labour history. How surprising to find that third way Labour is now the only left-of-centre party in Europe in over 20 years to make the positive case for raising taxes.   The immediate suspicion is that Mandelson, who whispers often in the prime ministerial ear, is still doing his old master's bidding. Is this Number 10 applying the brakes to Number 11's new tax policy? No, on tax the two Downing Streets speak as one. Tony Blair yesterday gave a special press conference to stress support for a free NHS paid for from general taxes with no spurious hypothecation. Some 89% of people have no private health insurance, there is no free lunch and the voters know it.   Let the Tories try anything else and they'll be deader than they are already. The harder they seek for foreign alternatives, the worse fix they are in. Load more tax on to employers insurance, with resulting higher unemployment and business fury? Make people pay to visit their doctors? It's "Tina" time.   However, New Labour habits die hard. No sooner does a clarion cry for more taxes go out, than the old panic sets in. No, no, old Labour is not back in the saddle! Cue Milburn's rapid announcements with a rightwing flavour - Bupa to run a hospital, long-waiting patients to go private or abroad, an internal market is re-established. Making NHS announcements has become a purely political act. Meddling ministers yet again raise huge public expectations that will be disappointed. Not many patients will be spirited into private rooms full of flowers like the Bupa leaflets, yet now they will expect it. This announcement is yet again timed for political more than operational purposes. The private option shoots another Tory fox while infuriating the unions, which New Labour always had a taste for. While acting out of pure politics, it allows the prime minister to proclaim himself not doctrinaire, just seeking the best deal for patients.   How much privatisation will there be? Probably not much - the 20 new hospitals, if all privately run, might eventually do some 250,000 of the 6m NHS operations a year. Why not more? Because although the private sector has 50% of its beds empty, "capacity" is not metal bedsteads, it is surgeons' time and that is in short supply. Though some now work dangerously long hours, some moonlighting privately late at night and at weekends for hours that would land lorry drivers in court, there is a limit to their capacity. The NHS will not pay private hospitals just to provide incentives for more of them to switch into the private sector. But it does makes sense to use private hospital beds in crisis times when NHS surgeons are often left twiddling their thumbs, all their beds used up by winter pneumonia patients.    Managers are wondering where the incentives will fall. Some might be good, some bad. Hospitals with long waiting lists will see their patients spirited away into private clinics, taking thousands of NHS pounds with them - bad. But that will act as a financial spur to managers to cut their waiting lists - good. Yet it is surgeons who mainly manage their own lists. Will they want to keep their lists long so patients qualify for private treatment? In many areas the same surgeon would follow his patient into the private clinic where he would collect a fee for the operation instead of doing it free under his NHS contract: that would certainly be a perverse incentive.   So will the private sector make a fortune? The reverse could be the case. As little as a 3% increase in capacity would change the landscape. The government plans to bring in hit teams with doctors and nurses from Germany, where there are spares, to perform blocks of   operations at a fixed price. Private hospitals might find the bottom falls out of the market with the price driven down. As the number of NHS long-waiters drops, demand for private treatment falls and so will doctors' fees. This approach could break some restrictive practices: in some countries technicians do cataracts or other procedures, specialising in one operation. Bringing them in would drive down the private rate for the job.   These are the market ideas around. Curiously, they might diminish the private sector in the long run. Bupa will quickly find that if they treat large numbers of NHS patients in their private clinics, waiting lists will fall and so will demand for Bupa health insurance. There is, incidentally, another hidden wheeze in this plan: long-waiting patients will get to choose, but if they opt to keep their place on the waiting list they will no longer count in the statistics as they had another option. The GP fund-holding experience showed that mainly only the higher social classes and the young were prepared to travel further for an operation, with the old and poor preferring familiar local hospitals. The happy result is that many more people may come off the long-waiting statistics than will actually opt for more expensive treatment elsewhere.   So a relatively small injection of private health into the NHS may have a profound effect - some of it perverse, but most of it could strengthen the NHS in the long run. There is no model here yet for any significant shift from public to private, but an interesting bit of grit in the oyster. Once the NHS gets the money it needs, remains free, paid for by general taxation and staffed as it is by dedicated believers in public service, it should thrive. If politicians stand back and let it.