A loud groan of pain echoed through the wards and clinics of the NHS this week. Another review? Another clever political wheeze, turning everything upside down?  Adair Turner, former head of the CBI, is conducting yet another review of NHS management, for Tony Blair. It runs in competition with Gordon Brown's review of funding and management, conducted by Derek Wanless, whose interim report last week urged a public, not a private, NHS future.   Turner was appointed quietly last August, but it was then "low key" and "might not be published", until suddenly this week - not to be outdone by Number 11's review - Number 10 made Turner high profile, heavily promoting him to the BBC. Turner, it is reported from within, is on a "steep learning curve" perusing mountainous NHS tables and charts. A clever chap with no knowledge of health; here is yet another outsider re- inventing the NHS wheel (insiders despair that Blair only trusts outsiders).   Bright people are easily excited by the intellectual challenge of the NHS - they always find The Answer. So does every politician and great upheavals follow, at least two per decade, distracting and disrupting the NHS. Their effects are seldom worth the trouble they cause.  But by the time a new structure might be assessed, those responsible are long gone and new, fidgety fixers are reforming it all over again. The motive is always political, the upheavals   immense, the results dubious.   This time it is even worse. These rival "reviews" are the direct result of the dysfunctional relationship between Number 10 and Number 11, drawing up rival plans, competing for control of NHS hospital managers, who are nearing despair.  Gossip - who loves/hates whom, who flew into a temper, who is psychologically flawed - could until recently be left to the political commentators who enjoy intrigue more than they care about solid outcomes.   But now dysfunction at the top is spilling into the real world with lethal effect. (London's tube is another such problem.) In a full page ad in yesterday's Guardian, the GMB, "Britain's general union", placed a picture of a premature waif in an incubator above a flattering photo of the chancellor, warmly quoting his wholehearted support for a fully publicly- run NHS: it was designed to promote a True Labour chancellor over a New Labour prime minister.  The NHS baby in the middle is the one to worry about: it is now the battleground not just between government and opposition or government and hostile tabloids, but within the government, between Blair and Brown and between Brown and imaginary pretenders. The important debate about how much of the private sector the NHS might use is now entirely political, not practical.   This is what NHS managers have to contend with - wrong things done for purely political reasons, while they take all the blame. The health secretary, Alan Milburn, gets   cheap populist applause at the Labour conference for remarks about "how NHS managers never saved a life".  Prime minister, chancellor and health secretary all vie to rubbish managers - but the managers are mostly high calibre, yet take the full blast of their masters' political impatience. They are as precious as doctors, and cannot be hired, ready-made, from outside: Bupa managers have no experience of running complex general hospitals or health authorities.   NHS managers now face an impossible regime of conflicting and perverse targets. The chancellor's public service agreements already micro-manage all spending on health. Now the prime minister is taking counter-control with Number 10's delivery unit drawing up "contracts" establishing micro-delivery of everything.  On top of that Number 10 has another new unit, the office of public service reform, going over the same ground. As if that were not enough, the full Wanless review will emerge from Number 11 (and be challenged by Number 10's Turner review).  These will be ideologically opposed, since Wanless has been sent along the public sector route while Turner's terms of reference include use of the private sector, incentives within the NHS and "contestability" (a polite word for market competition).   This insanity comes just 18 months after the prime minister's popular 10-year plan. Unlike previous plans, it was warmly welcomed by everybody in the NHS. Labour's new health inspectorate needs time to make a difference.  But before any of this has had time to work, all is in upheaval yet again, with combat between Number 10 and Number 11. "Despair," said a voice from within the health department. "Madness," said an unhappy voice speaking for NHS managers, "They always think there is a magic bullet."   The truth is that the NHS has been grievously starved of £267bn over 30 years. Serious money is at last flowing but it will take decades to heal the service. Much spending will be invisible for years: junior doctors are working civilised hours, they are safer but their productivity has been lowered.  Registrars are rightly no longer operating alone, but having surgeons supervising them halves departmental productivity. Expensive cholesterol-lowering statins now reach all at risk and so heart disease survival will soar, but statistics will not register this for 10 years.   Politicians can never wait 10 years. This lot can't even wait 18 months for their own plan to roll out. Primary care trusts, Labour's (probably needless) restructuring dreamed up in opposition, will take 10 years to bed down - if they even get the chance. Obsessive interference by   know-all politicians micro-managing details destroys the good management that it wants to create.  Politicians are contrary and contradictory, abusing the NHS to make public gestures when they should defend and praise it. Sometimes they want absolute uniformity, no more postcode lottery with varying treatments. And now they talk of devolving power back to hospitals and GPs - as if they ever would do such a thing.  Virginia Bottomley still extols the NHS executive that (theoretically) put the service at arm's length from the Department of Health in her day, although there are those who recall her telephoning incessantly, starting at 6am when she heard something on the Today programme or read something in the papers that she thought needed a quick fix.   The present triumvirate of political meddlers is worse, at war with each other, grand- standing for ideological effect, making promises they cannot keep and blaming managers for failing to meet unrealistic expectations.  It is time they left the NHS out of their quarrels and started to trust the managers upon whom they depend. It is the task of politicians to manage public expectation and they have done it dangerously badly.  Money at last magically coursing through atrophied NHS veins will take time to heal, but have politicians the nerve to wait? If Adair Turner is really clever, he will report that more radical change would be the worst medicine for the NHS.