Next week the chancellor gives his pre-budget report. He may not say much. But listen for the briefings, catch the sound of new mood music: a critical change is in the air. The hard choices Labour has managed to side-step with such balletic agility until now finally have to be faced - taxes will have to rise if this high spending is to be maintained. The defining moment is upon them.  One by one, Labour chained itself to unbreakable promises on public spending, each of them remarkable for their size. On day one came the promise to put education first - essential for higher productivity and eliminating poverty. Next came the unexpected prime ministerial pledge to raise NHS spending up to the EU average in six years: never mind arcane arguments about exactly what it means, it costs a lot. Then came that breathtaking promise to abolish child poverty by 2020. When transport fell off the track, it too got a big pledge. Not one of those four commitments can be fudged because they are all Labour's gold standard for delivery. Nor is there any sign of trying to wriggle out either in Number 10 or Number 11: on these there is unity. Whatever the departmental fights over next summer's spending review - on these four there is no turning back.   As the rock meets the hard place, the truth is slow in reaching the people: all this must be paid for. So far only hints are scattered in speeches. At the Labour party conference Tony Blair defined the second election victory as a "historic shift" in public attitudes: "Investment to provide quality public services for all comprehensively defeated short-term tax cuts for the few." Gordon Brown's deeply coded plea for "building support for the budget and spending decisions" might have been missed had busy briefers not said yes, it does mean taxes must rise - probably national insurance.   Not so long ago the chancellor's men would deny point blank what everyone knew: the price must be paid. No, they used to say, it can all be done without confronting the public with the hard choice. There was befuddling by figures, stealth taxes and obfuscating argument with the Tories about whether the total "tax burden" had risen (it did by 1.2%). The very concept of a "burden" was Tory language: low tax good, high tax bad. But New Labour had swept to power accusing its adversary of "23 Tory tax rises". It has now fought two elections promising never to raise income tax, not even the top rates. This Labour chancellor had the cheek to torment the Tories by cutting income tax by 1p, to general merriment. However hard you argued with Brown or Blair's men, they used to sneer that raising tax was just an ideological talisman, a hang-up of the old left, an out-dated badge of political correctness. Many were the wiggings from the Treasury accusing others of yearning to tax for tax sake, the old politics of envy just to make the rich pips squeak.   No longer. Quite the contrary. Their eyes light up as they urge all and sundry to start the debate, to engage the public in the need to pay towards the things they want. So how do they row back from years of Tory tax talk to a new social democratic praise of tax as the only instrument for delivering public services? At the moment it looks like rowing across the Atlantic in a leaky tub. Oblique hints and background briefings will not be enough. For more than 20 years the voters have heard every electable politician denounce taxes as the work of the devil. One minister has just emerged glumly from a series of focus groups about how to pay: the people wanted everything but would give nothing, just as politicians taught them over the years. Mention this to Treasury people and the gratifying response now is: "Oh, focus groups tell you nothing!" The case hasn't been made yet: the leaders have to go out and sell the value for money of taxes well spent.    It is a hard case to make while still so much of the new spending is simply filling in holes left by the previous years' drought. Taxpayers will need to see proof with their own eyes by 2003, the year taxes will have to rise sharply. But there has never been a better time to make the case. The Tories are lost fish, floundering on unfamiliar Labour dry land over public services. The Tory low tax regime squandered a £30bn peace dividend in defence cuts after the cold war and still left a £50bn deficit and public services in ruins. They can only shift the focus back to taxes if Labour foolishly lets them by failing to make the case now.   Here is the scale of the problem. Latest EU figures show public spending at 39.1% of GDP in Britain, 52.1% in France, 45.9% in Germany. Tory health spokesman Liam Fox, just back from France, gives gloating interviews about its brilliant health service - but no word about its public spending or the high social insurance French employers pay. The Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates what it would take to reach European spending. If we spent an extra £5bn each year (that means finding a new £5bn source each year), that increases spending by just 0.5% of GDP. At that rate it would take some 14 years to reach Germany's level and 26 years to reach France's. (We might not want to, but it gives an idea.) How much is £5bn? One penny on national insurance is worth £3bn. But hampered by the "no income tax" pledge, each year new sources must be found. The scale of underspending over decades is now revealed and the government has bravely bound itself to redress it - but the cost is high.   This is where their mettle is tested to the utmost: the prime minister finds taxes harder than war. It is time to start telling the public in stark terms, but linguistically they are still fencing. The chancellor schmoozed the politically bigoted Institute of Directors last week with an undeserved tribute "commending you as individual company directors, executives and managers on the work you do, the service to our country you give, the difference you make to the economy and prosperity to all". Having already cut corporation tax to below even US levels and business capital gains to just 10%, he then promised them "further measures" of company   tax cuts. As the Institute of Directors is always first to bellow a Thatcherite soundbite at any suggestion of employers' social responsibilities or more taxes, appeasing them is no way to change the terms of discourse about tax. Hard truths need to be spoken from now on, to every audience, if hearts and minds are to be shifted.   The chancellor will rightly press on to take the second 1m children out of poverty: more WFTC, new baby bonds and added income support for children will be there. Spending plans up to 2003 are secure: it is the next round that needs new taxes. Watch out for the way he talks next week. Will he avoid the usual boast about Britain's low tax "burden"? Above all, will there be robust praise for all that taxation delivers?