Two squads of angry Railtrack shareholders marched in to see Stephen Byers yesterday. He gave no quarter. They will get exactly what the administrator says they are owed when assets have been valued - not more, not less. Never mind the bleating of companies like Fidelity which bought an astounding 4% of Railtrack shortly before it was wound up. Fidelity says it was investing for its "more aggressive" portfolios: "We didn't buy it for widows and orphans." Dutch bank ABN Amro had already warned in June of Railtrack's imminent "massive value destruction": they priced the shares at between 50p and nothing at all, which caused a stink in the City at the time. But too few heeded it. Shares have stood at £17 in their time, many made money previously - but shares can go not just down but belly-up. Tough. Tough too on small shareholders, but the same rules apply.  Day by day the unfolding affairs of Railtrack expose the enormity of the monster created by Sir George Young and John Major. Byers' people fulminate about an impossible structure with no built-in incentives to contain costs, the government as infinite milch-cow. Estimates for renewing the West Coast Main Line rose from £2bn to £7.5bn - and that happened on everything, with no "transfer of risk" to the private sector. From the start battalions of lawyers for train operators and Railtrack spent fortunes arguing over whose fault everything was. At every minor meeting between Railtrack managers   and train operators to discuss train frequency or opening a station, lawyers from both sides were always present, ticking up astronomical costs. "The downfall of Railtrack was because those costs went out of control" concludes Christian Wolmar, author of Broken Rails. None the less daily fire-bombing of Byers and his department continues, led by the Times and the Tories.   Byers has a winning case: if the company was bust and the structure an abortion, no prudent minister should pour buckets-more tax-payers' boodle into shareholders' pockets. So why does Byers talk with a drawer-full of socks in his mouth instead of walloping the Tories from here to kingdom come for what they did? Instead he is taking an astonishing beating over the details of exactly when he deemed Railtrack irredeemable. The law is to blame, claim insiders. For reasons that defy politics or common sense, Byers has been forbidden by lawyers from saying in public that Railtrack was unworkable from the start: this would admit the government mis-sold shares to innocent investors - even though it was a different government. (There is, apparently, no way of prosecuting Major or Young for this offence.)   Byers's winding up of Railtrack was immensely popular, promising a mutual company in its place. But since then the public has heard nothing but confusion and false Tory accusations about cheating pensioner shareholders. Byers has been told not to use the words   "not-for-profit" company as it might frighten the City. It is now described as a "company limited by guarantee" which means the same but is leaden language without political resonance. A speculative sniff of interest from WestLB claims they might want to take the company over. To behave with due probity, the administrator must look fairly at any bid. Whatever the bidders' motives, this certainly helps rattle the government's cage and the shareholders' tins. "Of course if anyone came up with a convincing bid to run it without government money, well, wonderful!" is the ironic insider's view.    Fat chance. Under Railtrack, one third of the money came from the private sector, two thirds from government. So all this leaves Byers mumbling through lawyers' socks and the public is perplexed. Is it to be re-privatised after all? Exceedingly unlikely, but no one can say so.   There is another good reason for Byers's strangulation. On December 19 he will get final contracts for the London tube PPP, no doubt delivered by forklift since they stack four feet off the ground. Recently London Underground, driven to hurry it   through, has given the three companies huge extra concessions. Rudderless, with no chief executive and a finance director with less than a month left, these deals have been struck in haste with "preferred bidders" leaving London Underground with no bargaining position.   Here are a few typical concessions. Penalties for companies failing to meet targets have been relaxed: before there were fines for every "service point" failure, now they can clock up 40,000 points before they pay anything. (That alone is worth £5m.) Now they get "credits" for over-performing which will distort priorities. For Railtrack, this useful wheeze meant the company earned a bonus of £25m one year, without meeting a single key target, by over-performing on minor things. Never mind if trains are late, it may pay better to clean the platforms twice. There used to be a cap on tube performance bonuses: now the cap has been removed altogether.   To assess credits and penalties, lawyers will check when a light bulb was fixed or an escalator repaired with 10 terrible levels of arbitration before reaching the courts. The costs for London Underground's lawyers to dispute every late train are not estimated. Originally trains would be tested for performance at random, but now operators can exclude 40% of their worst lemons, just checking the best 60%. Many more benchmarks have been eased.   The most remarkable new clause undermines the entire financing. For the first seven   years, the government will already be paying 75% of everything, the companies only paying 25%. If at the end of that time, companies cannot raise any more money for the next period, the government will pick up all the slack. Yet the contracts themselves still run unbreakably for 30 years. There is no way out except by paying the entire profit the companies have been promised for the whole 30 years. There is no "termination for public interest" clause. Remember, all this began with a zero state subsidy, which rose to £8bn and is now set at £13bn.   If Stephen Byers is curiously muted about the Railtrack fiasco, that is because he is trundling obediently along Gordon Brown's primrose path to creating another one for the tube. There is still time for him to spot that the tube PPP has all Railtrack's worst defects - mainly the daily "conflict resolution" between warring lawyers. There is time for him to hint to Ernst and Young that he would welcome their "value for money" final check on the deal to come up negative. (Those who pay the consultant pipers usually get the tune they want.) There is time for Stephen Byers to get uncharacteristically brave and face down the chancellor who is adamant and obstinate on this, when barely another member of his party supports it, including the prime minister. There is still time for the prime minister to face his chancellor down, to puncture a pride that has turned deaf to reason.