Already 57 benefit offices are on strike. Now the entire benefits agency (BA) and employment service (ES) threaten to be out by December, seriously disrupting payments to claimants just in time for Christmas.  The Public and Commercial Services Union (PCS) claims this is about protecting benefits agency staff by keeping them behind bullet-proof screens. The union's advertising campaign features a woman (a model), with a black eye: "Threats and assaults on staff doubled last year to over 5,000... We will not gamble with members' safety." But this is a strangely old-fashioned tale of a hard left leadership defending old union turf against the interests of consumers - in this case the poorest clients in the land.  Here is the story: the government is merging job centres with benefits offices so that claimants have a one-stop shop and a single personal adviser. In these new Job Centre Plus offices one personal adviser helps them fill out claim forms and also helps them find a job or training. Claimants need no longer trek between offices, often several bus rides apart, to sign on, look for work and deal with benefit problems. Fifty-seven of these new prototype offices have opened, each costing £1m to refurbish. But as they have no screens between staff and public the PCS has called them all out on strike. (However, of the one-third of staff on strike, it turns out very few are actually frontline staff who ever meet the public.)   First, visit the old world. Balham benefits office is the archetype of everything that is worst about the benefits system. Think of the signing-on queue in The Full Monty and you get the picture - a large, bare, lino-floored room, battered plastic seats in rows screwed to the floor and a big ticket-machine where you take a ticket and wait and wait and wait. Staff sit behind cubicles with bullet-proof glass so thick that both sides have to raise their voice to be heard. By the time people reach the cubicles they are inclined to shout anyway - the environment provokes it. If anyone does shout, the officer can simply get up and walk out. Sometimes they get up and walk away inexplicably anyway: nothing in that Soviet environment is politely explained.   Staff can be as rude as they like, since no one else sees or hears. Civilised conversation is all but impossible: the officer has absolute power, the claimant is absolutely powerless. No way could officers behind glass transform themselves into friendly new personal advisers, eager to help clients find work and training,   lend a sympathetic ear to problems and proffer long-term solutions.   Come now to the pristine new £1m Job Centre Plus office in Streatham, a bus ride away. Step in and a friendly greeter directs you to the right seating area. The carpet is thick beneath the feet, the modern open plan is calm and quiet. Large, soft, deep red armchairs are grouped in clumps round low tables: no queues, no tickets, but booked appointments that are rarely more than minutes late.   Once called to a small desk, the customer talks to a personal adviser, private yet visible: if anyone shouted people would turn and stare, a great deterrent. Discreetly, two floor-managers, two specially trained security guards, 33 CCTV cameras and an alarm on every desk offer protection. Mixing benefits and employment, there is no sense of stigma here, where employers conducting interviews and the employed sorting out national insurance problems are indistinguishable from benefit claimants.   The staff dress smartly in suits as a mark of respect to customers. Every office is being refurbished in this lavish aggravation-reduction style. They want people to feel staff are on their side because they want to encourage people into work. But this is the environment the union rejects in favour of Balham-style barricades.   How great is the risk of attack to benefits staff? Five thousand "threats and assaults" sounds bad. But on closer inspection - and by the union's own admission - there were only 159 actual physical attacks last year. The other 4,841 were verbal abuse. Since benefit staff have 20m meetings with clients a year, those 159 assaults dwindle into a pretty low risk. Any assault is horrible and some are serious, but this risk ratio is lower than many other occupations. Are teachers to teach behind glass, or nurses to nurse in body armour? The answer is to create calm and treat clients well - not to build provocative defences.   So what is this really about? The PCS, the largest civil service union, has a long, warring leftist history: its split NEC only just voted to strike. Its new leader, Mark Serwotka is hard-left Socialist Alliance: his election address boasted: "I have led many successful strikes." What lies beneath this?   Merging the workforce of the moderate employment service (ES) and the more militant benefits agency (BA) is tricky, though pay, union and qualifications are the same. ES staff in Streatham told me BA staff look down on them, while they think BA staff high-handed and rude in their daily dealings with them and with clients. Traditionally BA staff have been "lightly managed" and sometimes the union runs the show. In Balham, for example, 300 staff have two full-time trade union reps, financed by the taxpayer. What do they do?   Mark Serwotka is surprisingly frank.   They chose the screens issue, he told me, as the easiest "testing ground". If this strike succeeds, they'll move on to other issues. He complains that ES management style is dominating the new centres. He finds the new dress code "inflammatory" and "gimmicky" (BA staff wear T-shirts and jeans to interview clients, but in the new offices they must look smart). Had he taken up repeated invitations to visit a new office? "No, I haven't visited one." How can he lead a strike against new offices he has not even seen? Presumably he fears it will be harder to argue against such a dazzling improvement.   So far only a third of staff are on strike, despite the union paying 85% of all wages - a virtually free holiday on offer. Few frontline staff are striking - the very people this is supposed to protect. The ballot was swung by back-room BA staff who rarely see a client. Most staff in Streatham are still work ing in their plush offices, where both BA and ES advisers I met said they would never ever work behind screens again.   Already claimants around the country are being forced to go long distances to collect payments. Some payments are seriously delayed, some people cannot get crisis loans and refugees cannot get the National Insurance numbers they need for jobs. Now the union threatens an all-out strike. "It would be a tragedy," says the work and pensions minister, Alistair Darling, "but the new Job Centre Plus offices will never have screens. The staff like it and an all-out strike would make it hard to maintain payments for the most vulnerable." At best this is a strike called for petty interests of some backroom BA staff, at worst it is cynically political, designed to give the government a bloody nose at the expense of the poor.