When Gordon Brown looks back on his career and broods darkly on why he never became prime minister, London Underground may be carved on his heart.  It might be unfair, but if ever there is an accident (they happen every 13 years on average), it will become his personal Hatfield. It will not be seen as one unlucky event but as a symbol for all his deeply unpopular hospital PFI deals too, a totem of obstinacy and pride.  If Tony Blair bends too easily to populist influence, it can be worse to have a leader who listens to no one.  By personally driving through the public-private partnership against expert advice, against the will of most MPs and voters, this has now become the Gordon Brown Memorial tube: every late train, failed signal and heat-fainting passenger is his fault, as from last week.  Every packed platform perilously close to tipping people on to the electric lines will be down to him - when he could and should have devolved it all to the mayor.   Yesterday as Ken Livingstone unfolded his transport plans, there was a slightly improved chance that Gordon Brown might still be unhooked from his own petard when the case of GBrown v the Rest of London comes to court in a fortnight.  Bob Kiley's tube PPP compromise deal has now been included in the mayor's official strategy for London, which has a legally binding status. It could offer an extra lever for the court to find in favour of the mayor, but in truth   few expect the mayor to win.   For those who are not London tube sardines, this is only the most extreme example of PFIs galloping through the country. Some small, clearly defined projects work well, but large long-term contracts increasingly look as if they are milking public funds for minimal public benefit.  Norwich and Carlise PFI hospitals will not be the only local scandals. London Underground PPP, the most horrendously complex of all, now has few supporters - except a PM bound to stand by his chancellor.  This is Gordon Brown's Groundnut Scheme, his poll tax. As with Mrs Thatcher, each impossible obstacle simply alters the stated rationale for the plan.   In the beginning this was going to cost the taxpayer zero. That was its best argument: why should non- Londoners pay up for the capital's transport? All revenue would flow from ticket prices alone. (Never realistic.) But as negotiations progressed, the bidders demanded more state cash. Now the taxpayer will put in £700m rising soon to £1bn every year for ever. (And if they run into trouble, as with Railtrack, who can refuse them more?)   Consider this. The deal went so badly on key questions of control and cash that Kiley had to walk away last week, so where does that leave negotiations now? Stephen Byers has ordered - yes, ordered - the London Underground managing director, Derek Smith, to complete the failed negotiations forthwith.  That is a political imperative, for no commercial deal was ever struck on such terms. There is no competition between companies now to keep prices down: there are only preferred bidders who are delighted to find they have the government over a barrel.  Mr Smith is "bargaining" with them, a gun at his head. Professor Tony Travers, director of the Greater London Research Unit at the LSE, looks on aghast: "The preferred bidders can add any number of noughts to the deal and wait until they get it. The government demands a quick deal at any price - any price is what they will get."  Obliged to complete a deal, the most basic rules of commerce and competition have been abandoned. In the heat of the moment, the government forgets these companies are not their friends, but obeying their duty to shareholders - not wicked, just business.   Not surprisingly, as soon as preferred bidders were announced, shares in those companies jumped up and stockbrokers are telling clients to cash in on the PFI boom.  One letter from HSBC stockbrokers to clients sent out last week extols Balfour Beatty shares (a big tube bidder) thus: "It is the rapidly expanding PFI business that has caught investors' interest.  The group has been one of the most successful participants in the government's £20bn PFI programme and has had successful bids for the construction and management of hospitals, roads and two major power projects, while there are further opportunities in healthcare, transport and education."   One Merrill Lynch broker confirms "PFI has boosted most companies in the sector". The attraction, he says, is long-term profits: once the construction phase is over the money still pours in.  Many contracts have an exaggerated "risk" element, so once the building is over, the companies renegotiate loans at better rates and the money flows. The government belatedly clawed some back, but profits are still assured as never before. Even stockbrokers, though, choke over the tube deal - maybe because many of them travel on it.   Talk to anyone on the public or private side of these deals, and the story is the same. Money is being made hand over fist out of PFI - and it is not win-win.  The original argument that PFI levered in new capital funds not otherwise available from the Treasury was dismissed by the IPPR report: the Treasury could have raised the money more cheaply.  But each time one argument is demolished, another is produced - exactly like Mrs Thatcher and the poll tax. Now the reason given is that the private sector's canny management gets better value out of the same money.  But alas, it is precisely that business canniness that runs rings round public servants over the contracts and makes fortunes for private investors. One excellent hospital manager, from the private sector himself, speaks of his deep reluctance to sign these bad financial deals but the Treasury said it was PFI or nothing. What else could he do?   PFI works well in some small projects where there is a valid profit for the private sector too: one Labour MP praises a local deal where a school sold off part of a playing field, in exchange for a gleaming new sports centre available to the school all day, but used as a private leisure centre at night and weekends - a genuine win-win with legitimate profits not derived from milking public contracts.   Gordon Brown is an enigma to his colleagues. Very few MPs support the big PFI deals - London MPs vigorously oppose the tube PPP. Quite a few ministers mutter their disquiet. Yet they praise the remarkable good he has done on child poverty or childcare - equally all his own work.  Having accrued so much power over everything, he deserves personal praise for the best - but takes personal blame for the worst too, something his people get increasingly angry about ("It's the prime minister too!" they expostulate). Despite vaulting ambition, Coriolanus-like, he will not bend to please the people.  This son of the manse seems driven to do what his voices tell him is right, even if it harms him politically. Admirable principle or dangerous pride?