A small tragedy is unfolding that could and should be prevented. A credit union held up as a famous model of self-help in one of the poorest places is about to crash. Some 3,000 people stand to loose every penny of their very hard-earned life savings. At conferences on social exclusion, the Camberwell Credit Union has been presented as the exemplar, with its members testifying movingly to how it saved them from loan shark penury and above all, how it gave them pride in their local community as they banded together to create something for themselves. Credit unions have been extolled time and again by Labour ministers. But now its members face a shattering loss.  It was mainly West Indians who founded the union some 20 years ago when they were denied ordinary bank accounts. So they set up their own community bank on the North Peckham estate, (where Damilola Taylor was murdered), drawing in people from every background paying in some £5 a week.  They include the student single mother who scraped together £220 for her son's future, the Irish widow on benefits with two children who will lose £350, the 67-year-old West Indian chef who will lose £3,500 for his old age and the elderly woman whose son put £5,000 into her account as she had no savings; 24 people had £800 each put into their accounts by Southwark council for new furnishings when they were decanted while the estate is rebuilt.  They have all been told that due to bad debts, they will only get 50p in the pound back: if it is forced to close, the liquidators fees will take the rest.   The Financial Services Authority (FSA) discovered a shortfall of £200,000 and ordered the books to be frozen as an insolvent organisation. It was not fraud but over-lenient lending that destroyed them, as has happened before with these small, amateur run banks.  The very thing that makes credit unions so attractive to urban regenerators, encouraging social enterprise with deep community roots, is also what makes them perilously vulnerable. If Camberwell goes under it will send a frightening message to all the other 450 community credit unions. Expect a run on them by vulnerable people who simply cannot afford to take any risks. It could spell the end for many small community unions.   A rescue is being attempted by Harriet Harman together with Tessa Jowell, whose constituents are among the losers. The FSA is doing what it can to help. Southwark council has put in £20,000. The necessary £200,000 is not a large sum for the Treasury and big banks to stump up between them. But the Treasury has so far refused, claiming it would set a precedent for bailing others out.  However, as from July 2002 an excellent new law designed to strengthen credit unions will bring their members under the same umbrella as banks, protecting savers from any future collapse. So a Treasury rescue only risks a minor precedent for another year.   The British Banking Association has been asked for help too, but so far not a penny has been forthcoming. Banks have no interest in picking up 3,000 poor customers who cost more than they bring in. The only hope is that some might see this good cause will bring them better publicity than they could ever buy with a mere £200,000 of advertising. Particularly as the money would only be needed as a long-term guarantee and they would probably get it back.   "Financial exclusion" has much exercised this government - a big phrase for not having any money. With puritan fervour this chancellor is trying to create a savings culture to help the feckless poor who save too little.  There have been brainstorming seminars inside Number 11 and much research commissioned to delve into the savings habits of the poor. (Most were found to be "jamjarring".) Imaginative new schemes have been devised, such as baby bonds to give poor children a capital start in life. Or the new "savings gateway" where the government will match pound for pound any money the poor manage to save.   The other hope was the promised Universal Bank, to be set up within the post office. It should have been unveiled with a flourish yesterday, but at the last fence the deeply antagonistic banks balked again: so far not one of the 11 have signed the Memorandum of Understanding to bring it into being.  They have dragged their heels and succeeded in yet again trouncing the government, offering the minimum while contributing a minimal sum. The DTI has been frustrated in its negotiations by the Treasury forbidding them from threatening the banks with any hint of compulsion or punishment. "It would have been handy to have more cards in our hand," said one DTI negotiator ruefully.   Banks never wanted poor customers cluttering up their queues, paying in and out piffling sums at more cost than they were worth. Banks rarely lend sums under £1,000, so the poor needing small loans have only the loan sharks charging anything up to 150%, from whom they never escape. Now it emerges that the Universal Bank has partly stalled because all the commercial banks are arguing amongst each other, not competing for this new custom but each fighting to take on as little as possible.    When the Universal Bank was first announced, ministers talked boldly of the banks' "moral obligation" to compensate society for with drawing from rural and poor urban areas. Now it will probably be a puny thing, primarily a cheaper way for the government to pay out benefits and a support for post offices - no use at all in helping the poor avoid crippling loan shark debt. Benefits will be paid into post office "card accounts", that do nothing else. Post offices will then urge people to go into banks and open basic accounts which offer almost nothing - and certainly no loans, though they can at least be accessed thereafter over post office counters. This is barely better than the jam jar: government claims that people can get discounts from paying utility bills by direct debit cut no ice with all those who can never afford to pay bills all at once.   Credit unions which require people to accumulate some savings before they qualify for small loans are a model of Brown prudence. However this admirable but pathetically small movement with just 100,000 community members and very shaky financial viability, usually only open for half a day a week, is not the answer for millions of people who need safe savings and loans with good financial advice.  Credit unions need to be professionalised, with government help. As for the Universal Bank, if Mrs Thatcher could windfall commercial banks, the chancellor could at least threaten it, unless they provide a decent savings and loan service for rich and poor alike.