While anti-capitalists stole the headlines, one group of wildcat strikers made a smaller splash yesterday. Hundreds of GPs shut up shop in protest at overwork, bureaucracy and other gripes. Meanwhile the BMA is balloting GPs to resign from the NHS if they don't get everything they want - the result designed to embarrass the government days before the election.  The BMA says its members are working harder than ever, taking over chronically ill patients from hospital outpatient departments, looking after people leaving hospital sicker, filling in more forms, shouldering a bigger burden in running the NHS - all of which is undoubtedly true. "Morale has never been lower," says the BMA, (but then NHS morale always is at the rock-bottom, along with teachers, BBC staff or anyone else asked by their unions).   However, alongside teachers, doctors top the poll in public trust, with 84% saying they do their job well. Most GPs work hard with great dedication, especially those in over-stretched inner-city practices where doctors are hard to recruit and patients need most care. But while there are plenty of idealistic, energetic GPs, as in all occupations, there are the other kind too - running practices with too many patients to clock up fat capitation fees, not delivering good enough care. Alan Maynard, professor of health economics at York University, says due to its private status, general practice is a data free zone, with no in formation on what GPs are prescribing drugs for, huge variations in prescribing and no outcome measurements. Until now GPs have not been appraised, while working to very vague contracts.   The virulence of this GP protest is odd. Doctor magazine, which called yesterday's strike, is in cut-throat competition with other drug advertising financed weeklies vying for GPs' fleeting attention with ever more lurid stories of an NHS in terminal collapse, doctors exploited in a life of medical hell. Their own survey claimed 90% of GPs "stressed", with eight out of 10 saying they would not recommend anyone to join their profession. The BMA is calling on GPs to "work to rule", with disgraceful actions for a responsible profession. They include: obstructing the NHS by referring more patients to hospital for minor treatments, calling out more ambulances, sending patients to other parts of the NHS or to the benefits agency medical service for second opinions.   It asks GPs to give "maximum publicity to health service failures or deficiencies", assuring them, "We have been advised that GPs taking these actions would not be in breach of their terms of service". The BMA leopard never changes its spots. It always opposes all change, including opposition to the NHS itself in 1948. From Bevan to Castle, to an assault upon the mostly sensible Thatcher/Clarke reforms, the BMA is short-sighted and grasping, but dismally predictable with its veneer of concern for patients thinly covering sectional interests.    Most GPs remain small businessmen, independent contractors, a concession forced on Bevan when he famously "stuffed their mouths with gold" to get them into the NHS at all. Mouth-stuffing has remained at the heart of their contractual relationship ever since. Every new treatment requires more money in their pockets for doing it - from diabetic care to contraception, flu jabs to infant inoculation. When they complain about paperwork and bureaucracy, the overwhelming majority of it is the bits of paper chasing their items of service, which make up the largest slab of their pay. One of their duties is to undertake 30 hours training a year: their most popular course is accountancy.   How much worse is their workload? The curiosity of this outburst is its timing. For the first time in doctors' memories things look set to get much better in the NHS - and for GPs especially. Indeed, when the leader of the BMA heard the chancellor's 2000 budget speech, with its biggest ever real 6.1% a year increase for four years, he tore up his usual sour press release and wrote remarkably, "We are delighted". At least 2,000 more GPs are promised: the number in training, which dropped 16% between 1990-1996, has now increased by 9%, with more promised. What's more, the GPs are the focus of power in the new NHS Plan: grouped in primary care trusts, they will soon control 75% of the NHS budget. No longer the neglected corner of the system, they will be its key purchasers. For too long the big money was syphoned off into hospital waiting lists, but this should push money back into community and preventative care, where some 95% of treatment is carried out.   By no means all GPs support the BMA and Doctor magazine's intemperate behaviour. Dr Tim Winch, chair of the primary care group in Kent Weald, formerly from an inner-city practice, is appalled and the BMA's obstruction of reform of GP practices. Calling for nationalisation of the whole GP service, his pithy press release dismisses GP leaders as "mass whingers". He thinks GPs do well with a minimum income of some £56,000 - many earning closer to £80,000 (or more) with extra payments for looking after local old peoples homes or myriad other paid jobs, plus good expenses.   It is odd that GPs are protesting about stress now, when their working hours have become more civilised. Since 1995 GPs rarely have to drag themselves out of bed at night, with locums doing night calls instead. Daytime home visits by GPs have halved during the last decade.   Dr Winch thinks GPs just don't realise how much harder everyone else works these days: their grumbling puts off new recruits to a decent profession with reasonable hours. The red book, which prescribes GPs work, requires only 4.5 days a week, 26 hours a week face-to-face with patients (which includes home visits), and nothing much else fixed. It is unclear why most surgeries have no evening or weekend sessions, when their patients work long hours, too. Official figures show the number of consultations GPs conduct a year has dropped slightly over the last 20 years, not risen as the BMA claims - though their patients are older and sicker. However, GPs do have many more nurses and other support now.   Agreeing a good new GP contract is vital for the success of the NHS Plan. GPs do need appraisals and greater quality control. However, the government's passion for performance indicators can lead to bizarre outcomes, distorting what people do to hit paper targets: they need to listen to what GPs say. But it is hard to listen patiently to hectoring BMA leaders who adopt such extreme and unwarranted tactics. A balance has to be struck between trusting GPs as respected, well-resourced professionals, while insisting on more scrutiny of what they do. Observers despair at the BMA's brutish ham-fisted behaviour. If GPs want a good contract that works well, their leaders' aggressive posturing makes it less likely.