Never has a government worried so much about "community". What is it? Can governments regenerate it for social good? Labour has been searching in the grassroots for clumps of it. Does it reside in the Rotarians, mothers unions, Women's Institutes, five-a-side leagues, mosques or churches? How elusive these social pressure points are, some eccentric, others empty vessels, unrepresentative of anything but themselves. In this pluralist, diverse society there are few easy entry points into the beating heart of any locality. What is urban freedom for many, a blessed escape from old lace-curtain community, is also desolate isolation for others.  Yesterday the American guru of community led a breakfast seminar in 10 Downing Street. Harvard Professor Dr Robert Putnam, author of Bowling Alone gave his causes of the collapse of community: television, two-career families, urban sprawl with commuting and the failure of the second world war generation to pass on war-time civic values to their baby-boomer children. Community is in decline - unions, churches, clubs, bowls, political parties, voting, even visiting bars. Where there is community, there is less crime, better school performance, more happiness. Belonging to one community group delivers the same volume of happiness as doubling your income.   Belonging to one group is so good for you that it reduces by a half the chance of dying in the next year, two groups reduces death risk by   three quarters. (Putnam's numerical sociology sometimes verges on numerology.)   One answer, he says, is faith-based communities which "enhance civic life" and he welcomes President Bush's intention to use them. "Faith-based organisations have a proven ability to reweave the fabric of distressed communities and they deserve support from government." And tomorrow the prime minister will promise it to them here. Addressing a conference of the Christian Socialist Movement, with other faiths in attendance, he will praise the good churches can do in community renewal and the value of church schools. Competing with William Hague, he will claim Labour values are closest to Christian values. True, according to Mori. The Church of England is no longer the Tory party at prayer: only 26% of its members vote Tory, 48% Labour. Among Roman Catholics only 17% are Tory, with 48% Labour. In this country the far right evangelicals are still a minority.   But mixing God and politics is a perilous business. If the PM's text is not well-worded he may risk the WI slow hand-clap. These are socialists who may question his Christian values from the left: members are pressing for a narrowing of the now widening gap between rich and poor. But outside the hall, the great agnostic/atheist British majority has a queasy distaste for politicians airing religious sentiments: it only fuels their cynicism.   At a breakfast this week, the Bishop of Liverpool and   the Reverend Steve Chalke explained their pitch to the prime minister for tomorrow's conference. Churches do community best, with the best volunteers and the best schools, the "faith dollar" goes further and they want more social funding. Chalke wants the prime minister to stop "hard left Labour councils" refusing to fund faith groups on the grounds that church groups only employ their own church members and Christian school teachers. Faith groups only work, he says, because they are all believers. He is not polite about "state" employees, as if they were clock-watching time-servers.    Churches attract politicians. Their edifices suggest an important place in communities, for lack of anything else tangible to grasp, despite often empty pews and aged congregations. But founding a national social policy around a church attendance currently at 7.5% (generous estimate) looks implausible. It is another colossal difference with the US which ought to make British politicians more wary of using US social thinkers. Robert Putnam is left of centre and knows Britain (unlike Hague's guru, Marvin Olasky, a bible-belt, anti-welfare anti-abortionist). But even so, Putnam's prescriptions sound essentially alien. His vision of community, for all his denials, looks like a return to the 1950s, women back to  Kinder, K&uuml;che, Kirche. His social determinism is out of step with modern times: it looks cynical to want poor people to join churches not because religion is true but because it is good for them.   The reason Labour's social policies may work where the old slum clearances failed over the years is because they focus on the people. Funding renewal through partnerships that join up all the local state agencies with voluntary groups is a way of reaching out through every tentacle to all that moves and breathes. Some churches do run brilliant social programmes for drug addicts, the homeless, the young and the old. But religious groups must take their place along with the other voluntary groups - funded and judged according to their results.   There is a lot of hocus-pocus talked about community, as if it were magic to be sprinkled about like holy water. Nostalgic for old community values, Putnam recalls the glory days of Elks, Salvation Army, choral societies, scouts and churches. But times change. Creating a new sense of community requires building on people's lives as they are now, the things people want enough to need to band together communally. Community activity always depended on women, but they have now gone out to work instead.   But seek out where   strangers do still meet and it is still largely parents - mainly mothers - outside school gates, playgroup or playground, at the checkout or the baby clinic. Ask communities now what they need most locally and the first answer is childcare - a guaranteed creche and nursery place for every child. Harriet Harman's recent childcare commission toured the country and that was the universal answer.   So if Labour wants to foster a new community spirit, start with beautiful children's palaces, attractive welcoming places, offering every service from ante-natal to after-school clubs. At a stroke it would bring together all parts of the community under one roof, in centres run by and for local parents, the only way to unite all classes, each contributing according to income. These would be the missing social heart-beat in each area, nurturing a multitude of voluntary and self-help groups, clubs, classes and community action, run by faith or non-faith volunteers side by side with professionals.   Now that would be community, but it doesn't come cheap. One estimate suggests £10bn for 10,000 centres. Money well spent, it would transform individual lives, binding together isolated families and socially divided communities everywhere. Kick-starting community requires less government angst and more government action. What a manifesto pledge that would be.