The cabinet was brainstorming yesterday. For two and a half hours - a long time in cabinet politics - they talked manifesto. Radical or steady-as-she-goes? Great leap forward or trudging solid step-by-step? We wait to see if it will be a bold proclamation of Labour's true values or a third way shuffle, another nervous unfocused bid for an imaginary middle England. The truth about middle England is that like everyone everywhere, it harbours a host of pluralist contradictions, hopes and fears, generosities and meannesses, depending which way the question is put. It is for politicians to offer strong leadership and clear choices, drawing out the best of impulses, rejecting the worst.  In all parties seasoned manifesto writers look back enviously to Margaret Thatcher's 1979 single pledge that was dazzlingly radical yet sublimely simple. It was the sale of council houses to their tenants. At a stroke a policy affecting relatively few voters struck a chord even among those who had never set foot in a council estate. It spoke eloquently of the best Conservative values: freedom from state servitude, upward aspiration for all, the Englishman's home as his castle, a property-owning democracy, concern for the respectable self-improving working class. It left Labour trapped in an old ideology that locked people into council housing for ever. It exposed Labour's dislike for upward mobility. A killer election-winner, Labour was toast.   Every party is now seeking their magic carpet policy - the one totemic winner that conveys the essence of an entire ideology, the very best of all they stand for. As it happens, Labour had one delivered to its doorstep this week, though the cabinet yesterday may not have recognised this jewel in its palm. It is the universal right to affordable childcare. The national childcare commission, assembled by the Day Care Trust, chaired by Harriet Harman and including rightwing Tory MP Edward Leigh, came up with proposals that would transform life for families.   "Motherhood and apple pie," said one sceptic yesterday. Just so and why not? This is the apple-pie vision. Rolling out from the poorest places first, every district will have a neighbourhood children's centre to house playgroups, mother and toddler groups, a creche, a nursery, antenatal clinics, health visitors, Sure Start programmes, after-school clubs and homework clubs for older children - a home from home with all children's services in one place.   Imagine a state of the art, beautiful building as a hub for the local community where parents assemble regularly, breathing new life into community activity. Isolated mothers meet here to learn and train with New Deal advisers to find them jobs.   "Blue sky thinking is very useful," said one tentative but wistful Labour minister, keen but anxious about the cost. It would be very expensive - 8,000 centres at £10bn or more. Add to that the cost of the commission's other radical proposal - that every mother should be allowed to draw down the cost of childcare for the first three years, and either keep it to stay at home or spend it on a creche or childminder. Currently low-paid working mothers can claim up to £70 childcare a week - a sum that could be there for all to work or not. What the commission report shows -blindingly obvious to anyone who bothered to ask - is that even mothers high up the social scale (Daily Mail middle England heartland) struggle miserably with the lack of childcare, high cost and hard to find. It causes desperate anxiety to most of the 75% of mothers who now go out to work. Commissioners listened to women cry as they reported handing over tiny babies to minders they didn't trust to go back to long hours to pay their mortgages. At the same time 65% of mothers who stay at home want to work but can't find or fund the childcare. The current system where the state subsidises anyone but the mother to care for a child makes no sense: choice is all.    Childcare is the gaping hole in the cradle-to-grave welfare state. Like health and education it cannot be provided privately: at £180 a week it is way beyond most pockets. There is no other solution but public provision. For years the Tories tried to get employers and the private sector to do it, but it never worked. Left-behind Britain still thinks it is not the state's business, though Germany, France, Italy, Denmark and the others have had excellent nurseries for decades. Founding the NHS was a monumental public good -very expensive, very daring and very popular. By promising a radical expansion of the welfare state, Labour would underline its profound belief in public services for those things that the private sector cannot do.   Politically, it would trump the Tories. They plan tax incentives for marriage as their family policy. Universal children's centres would be far too expensive for them. Copying Labour spending on health and education (though for how long?), they could not pretend to follow here. A high spending, high profile promise is just what Labour needs. It would leave them floundering - and voters with a clear choice. Tiny tax incentives for marriage will look pathetic beside a mighty promise for what families really need.   Today the Institute for Fiscal Studies    green budget will probably again discover the chancellor's surplus is far greater than he admits. "Surplus, what surplus?" Gordon Brown says crossly when anyone asks. But he is sitting on more than enough to pay for universal childcare. As Michael Jacobs of the Fabians wrote in these pages, we are £45bn underspent by the EU average. The government does have a national childcare strategy already spending sizeable sums, but with negligible political impact. It has no brand and no resonance, with excellent programmes but so far only for the poor. To promise a universal system for every baby and child would be a very different matter. If people don't know about Labour's childcare, that is because inheriting virtually none there is still only one childcare place (private or public) for every seven young children and   after-school club places for only one in 14 school children.   Will it happen? The cabinet doesn't quite get its powerful potential. One obstacle, as ever, is stone-age David Blunkett who yesterday left Labour MPs spitting with fury when he said he opposed any further help as it might encourage young girls to have babies. Thinking he'd been misquoted, I checked, but his office was adamant: that is his fixed view. Under-fives' minister, Margaret Hodge, on the other hand, was touring the studios giving broad encouragement to children's centres - a natural extension of what she is doing. Will they see that universal childcare is the magic family policy the Tories can never match?