The government's vision of the good society is there, even if it blinks on and off erratically sometimes. Yesterday the chancellor spelt it out again. Announcing new funds for encouraging a million more people to volunteer, he spoke eloquently: "A new era - the age of active citizenship and the enabling state - is within our grasp and at its core is a renewal of civic society". He proclaimed an end to "centralising government". He said the man from Whitehall no longer knows best, but the woman from the WRVS does.  Ministers keep saying it - the key to success in social programmes is through breathing new life into communities. Research into what works in urban renewal finds engaging the people is the only answer. On Monday the new "neighbourhood renewal action plan" is launched, designed to reach down into the heart of the poorest places, promising to rebuild communities from the bottom upwards. The word is local "empowerment".   The vision of the celestial city looks something like this: parents are involved daily with schools. Churches and local groups run after-school clubs, tenants on estates control their own budgets. All local departments pool their budgets, working together to offer whatever local people want most. Mentors guide and support young offenders, aspirant businesses, struggling readers, prisoners or depressed young mothers, connecting the disconnected. Thus local government is re born as people use the rusty levers of power in their communities. City mayors breathe new pride into public works. The comfortable aid the miserable, and in doing so find new meaning in their own lives. Happiness comes not from money - neither in high pay, nor in benefit cheque - but from a sense of inclusion and purpose, fulfilment for rich and poor alike. Community participation spreads warmth and becomes a good in itself, regardless of its output. "You get more out than you put in" is the slogan of the government's TimeBank* initiative, run by the BBC, the gateway to draw in new volunteers. Two thirds of the population should be giving two hours a week by 2005: the good society will wrap us all in its embrace.   And it is a good vision. But it sounds odd on the government's lips, an afterthought like a dusting of icing sugar, not the cake. The Tories were quick to point out the contradictions. This highly centralising government is suddenly "empowering" others? The woman from the WRVS knows better than Ofsted? Under Labour every social programme comes with rigorous targets to be monitored ruthlessly. Every penny of public money is tied up in a public service agreement, where departments deliver or die on their Treasury contracts. Yet suddenly the chancellor talks of letting go?   Labour has just tripped over the great dilemma for all modern social democracies. Progressives rightly believe in the power of   government to do good. And yet as central government takes command and delivers, the democratic roots dry up. Evidence-based policy making means centralised policy making. But if the good society means people doing things for themselves and one another, then communities need to be given a long rein and money without strings, free to make mistakes. Schools are the most thriving focus for communities, but would David Blunkett entrust them to the local whims of parents?   Community decisions may often be better than Whitehall's but they might also be much worse. Currently all the target-setting, league tables, national plans and Whitehall thumb-screws are beginning to deliver measurably better services. Is the Whitehall whip to be hung up? Universal standards and community empowerment are admirable but contradictory goals.   Another oddity: there is no clamour for community involvement. It is a top-down prescription in a time when people have deserted the churches, the Rotary Club, the WI, political parties and trade unions. They don't tell the pollsters they hanker after committees, minutes and points of order. Suggesting turning out for a neighbourhood meeting gets a dusty answer. Thatcherite individualism bred the idea that all fun is private and paid for, not public and communal. It is television at home, a meal at a restaurant table, a cinema ticket in the dark. With money now for luxury leisure, who but the desperate and the divinely dedicated seeks fun in a chilly Boy Scout hall with neon strip lights? The government is urging people to do it because it's good for them, like exercise and eating greens. "Enabling" sounds splendid, but how will people be levered out of their armchairs?   Can a new volunteering age happen? Can government do it? It will need a new spirit of enthusiasm for public things. Perhaps if people see local groups have real power and money, then investing time would seem worthwhile. If this is a serious policy then spending needs to bend towards what does induce a genuine sense of community. For parents, a beautiful nursery and creche with after-school clubs all sited together, right on their doorstep would build the first geographical bond between city-dwellers seeking company and mutual support.   If public places like these were welcoming and enjoyable, if schools and doctors' surgeries were pleasant places to meet, then local activism might spring naturally out of these hubs. Imagine adult education centres for fun or for employable skills   that weren't run-down, filthy places starved of funds.   Why not free sports centres better than private gyms? Public places have to match the comfort and pleasure of private homes if people are to be enticed back into the public sphere to do communal things. In Joseph Chamberlain's day the civic offered things to be proud of - magnificent public libraries, colleges, swimming pools, schools and meeting rooms that outshone anything people had at home. Now the reverse its true, where most council flat front rooms are more comfortable. Gordon Brown said this was not a left/right issue, but it is. The right would abandon the welfare state to private philanthropy, forcing charity to take over. The progressive approach has to be a generous and enabling state welcoming people lavishly back into a proud public life.   The time is right. There is an emptiness in many well-off lives and many would welcome involvement beyond their narrow worlds. But government exhortation sounds suspect while disconnected from any other policy. Citizens giving their time freely for the common good needs the government to give up some things too. Time is in short supply because Labour policy has made us the hardest worked nation in Europe, in desperate need of a better work/life balance, which only the government can effect. As for empowering the people, will the chancellor be first to let go?   TimeBank