The clear and present danger for the government is the fuel protest. But hard on its heels comes the annual NHS winter crisis, as certain as the solstice. Often it is flammed up in the thin news time between Christmas and New Year, but last year on top of the millennium there was a genuine flu crisis. Now extraordinary measures with carrots and sticks are ready to try to stop it happening again, just before an election.  The BBC's Today programme got off the mark a bit early this week with one of its regular winter surveys on how things are going in health authorities. Having done these myself in my time at the BBC, they are usually a sure fire hit as a story: not this time. Some 90% of health authorities said they were in a better position to deal with winter pressures than last year. These surveys take a long time to do, and it must be galling to get no headline at the end of it. So instead of leading with this key fact, they stuck it down at the bottom of their report and even said that the department of health "claimed" the 90% result, when in fact it was their own survey that "found" it. Downing Street rebutted sharply - and rightly. But all this is just a small taste of what is to come: if that's the BBC, wait for the Tory press to splash with any patient who gets less than the best in any hospital. The NHS is the frontline in the run-up to an election: truth is always the first casualty.   The Tories are sharpening their knives and in some places this is starting to take a sinister turn as national politics are being played out locally over the home care, hospital beds and nursing homes for ill old people. The aim under all governments of the last 20 years has been to try to force the NHS and local social services to pool funds and work together to stop hospital beds being filled up with frail old people who have no need of very expensive acute care. Local teams of social services domiciliary care workers together with community nurses and GPs try to keep them at home, catching early signs of flu before it turns into pneumonia. Finding nursing homes to move the frailest into is a growing problem, but gradually the two sides have been working better together. However, suddenly a new political motivation rears its head.   Many councils that were formerly Labour have switched to Tory control. Why should Tory councils direct money and effort towards relieving any possible winter chaos on the NHS? The winter planning group inside the   Department of Health is getting messages back that there is suddenly far less cooperation as Tory-controlled social services are drained of cash for the old. Some members of the Association of Directors of Social Services confirm that they think there has been a deliberate moving of funds away from services for the old by some Tory-led councils this winter.   The Labour group in Essex where the Tories took control question what is happening to social services there. Under the leadership of Lord Hanningfield, ennobled by William Hague, £2m was slashed from social services and council tax was cut. By August, in financial meltdown after the tax cuts, they set up a team to report on future cuts. It is not due to report until the end of November, just when the old-and-cold winter care season begins. The fear is that a massive round of new cuts will strike just as the local NHS will be expecting help from social services. Bungling inefficiency, no doubt. But once in a squeeze, there is not (to put it at its very mildest) a great political incentive to channel scarce funds into care for the elderly to stop bed-blocking in local hospitals. Similar reports are coming in from around the country, with a suggestion that Conservative central office is taking a keen interest.   However, to be fair, social services are under extreme pressure everywhere, in councils of all complexions. The chancellor ear-marked extra money for education and for children, but nothing for the frail old who are growing in number. A survey of social services two weeks ago found them badly strapped. If there is a winter crisis, the weakest point is here. For the NHS has had its largest dollop of cash for six years - a 7.4% increase. Talking to chief executives of health authorities, they say the money is there, buying more beds, more intensive care, more staff and - in a crisis - more treatment from the private sector. There are plenty of anxieties about lack of nurses - we are 30,000 short nationally - especially in rich areas where there is nowhere affordable for them to live. But broadly, most are not grumbling, which is news in itself.    So the winter plans are laid and the thumb-screws ready for any health authority that fails. Every area has its winter planning group, answerable daily to the winter emergency services team inside the department of health. The head of one local winter team describes how much pressure they are under: "It's been money with menaces, the political stakes are so high." There are calls almost daily from Whitehall. If any patient is left on a trolley waiting for a bed for more than 12 hours, the chief executive has to call the regional director, who calls Whitehall. Then, day or night, the chief executive must go in person to apologise humbly to the patient and the family. Last year this particular authority had to transfer   patients needing intensive care a hundred miles away. "This year that would be career suicide." Inside the bunker in Whitehall early warning systems prepare to zap rapid response teams into any hotspot, with extra money and managers. They will bring extra GPs into Accident and Emergency. Ambulances are kept in minute by minute contact, directing them to hospitals with lowest waiting times. Any over-65s have been seized and flu-jabbed, along with NHS staff. Deals are struck with private hospitals to take cold surgery cases, so waiting lists don't fall behind. This is war.   But all is quite different inside the social services departments, though much will depend on them. They are not controlled by any central bunker. (The time may come.) They have had cuts, not increases. The Association of Social Services Directors says the south-  east is hardest hit for services for the old, with no money to compensate for soaring costs. Old people with more capital now qualify for free care. Soon however rich, all will get three months free care and local social services will have to pay. The old live longer in their expensive nursing homes, costing more. Nursing homes are closing in the affluent south, as owners cash in on property values and staff are hard to find: 10,000 fewer nursing home places this year. The government needs to move fast to secure this missing link in its winter plans. It will be very difficult to prove that there are political shenanigans afoot in Tory-controlled councils deliberately provoking a winter crisis, when all social services are under genuinely critical pressure.