A plain brown envelope arrives. Inside is a draft of the government's next paper on "The Family", billed as part of Labour's armoury for the election. Some gun - more a voluminous paper bag of hot air, vacillating, banal and aimless. It displays yet again Labour's fatal need to be all things to all people, all the time. It trims to the moralisers while boasting of socially progressive policies. It bends to business, while expressing angst about over-worked parents - something to annoy everyone. Why never a clear principle?  The committee designed to anchor the government's family values was seized by the strong male arm of the Home Office, instead of tucked under the protective wing of Health. But the "family" needed the smack of firm discipline, the aura of parenting orders. The paper's one redeeming feature is that it has plainly been tugged in two warring directions amid much disputation. It's easy to imagine Patricia Hewitt, Margaret Jay, Margaret Hodge, Patricia Hollis - women being the liberalisers in this government - tugging for sensible practical policies, while Jack Straw, Paul Boateng, Alan Howarth and the men demand tin-eared cheap moralising.   So this is the result: you wonder anyone can still write without irony: "The government believes the family is the basic building block of our society." Sententiously it proclaims that happy two-parent families are best - but tugging the other way, it adds, "However, we know that other family structures can also be successful." It ping-pongs on this, getting nowhere. Who is this for? It is the kind of empty talk that makes politics mocked, a foggy code in a game far from life as lived nightly in soap operas or on the sofas where real families watch them.   A confusing string of facts has been assembled, thrown in by the committee's two opposing sides. Absorb these: 72% of families are headed by married couples, only 12% by a cohabiting couple. (Many of these must be old.) Lone motherhood has trebled to 22% (panic?). Last year saw the fewest marriages ever recorded (40% of them are remarriages, do they count?). The government actuary predicts a doubling of cohabitation in 20 years. By 2011, 39% of men and 31% of women will never marry. Two warring sentences about one another: "Children brought up by two birth parents had higher levels of life satisfaction, fewer psychological problems." But this is immediately countered by: "Children brought up in re- structured families without care experience or early disadvantage did not differ significantly from those brought up by birth parents."   All this is just a way of saying the blindingly obvious: children with either one or two parents do fine in stable, loving surroundings. Children with fighting parents, children in care or brought up cripplingly poor are at higher risk. All that matters is how many more or fewer children are in danger of serious emotional or physical deprivation - whatever their families.   What is the magic that politicians pretend to see in the marriage certificate? It increasingly eludes the present generation of parents where 40% of babies are now born outside marriage, but mainly to cohabitees. The "building block" and "institution" looks hollow to them and weddings an embarrassing sham. Four out of 10 marriages end in divorce.   There is a whole chapter on domestic violence, reflecting the same figures Scotland Yard announced last week: two women a week killed, a violent attack reported every minute and unreported every six seconds. But the government's rosy picture of ideal marriage never links these two together. If one in four women is attacked by her partner, half of them repeatedly in front of their children, isn't escape and bringing up children alone a better choice for that 25% of "families"? Single motherhood is often a cause to celebrate, an escape forbidden in the bad old days.   "We are not telling people how to live their lives, and even if we wanted to, we couldn't make it happen," says the paper, but its tone says otherwise. Jack Straw would like to tell people how to live their lives, though he has no more sticks and whips to crack families into line than did the back-to-basics Tories. William Hague's puny whip is to restore the £285 a year married couples allowance, as if that will get wicked cohabitees galloping up the aisle. What can Labour offer? This paper says that the (divorced) lord chancellor and the (divorced) Jack Straw are jointly producing a marriage information pack to give couples considering marriage.   Here's the reality check. Chapter 3: What Families Want. Real families said it was after-school clubs, parks, streets closed to traffic and, above all, childcare. No one asked government for help with their marriage. Many specifically said they wanted no interference "forced on the majority of caring, competent parents". There is no electoral mileage in marriage. Nor will it fool the Daily Mail. They'll make mincemeat of this. Where's the beef, they'll ask? Where's the marriage-promoting policy? The Mail might enjoy a note under a blank section called Divorce and Relationship Breakdown, reading: "Lord chancellor's department are unable to give any indication of what new initiatives may be taken forward in the area of divorce and relationship breakdown. Hopefully be in a position to provide some input in this area". The answer, mercifully, is that there are no new initiatives in this area after the welcome abandonment of the impossible Tory divorce law reform.   One section reveals how weak Labour is with employers on work/life balance, which strikes at the real heart of family life. Fathers with children aged under 11 work an average of 48 hours; a quarter work 50 hours. Mothers say they want flexi-time and term-time working, but Labour has left it to a voluntary campaign to persuade employers: no word of legislation here.   Unless the ministerial group rewrites this paper, any brouhaha it attracts will focus on this marriage nonsense. The great bulk of the document will pass unnoticed - a shame since it contains a long list of all the good Labour is doing for children. More than a million have been lifted out of poverty, benefits are better, schools are improving, a national childcare strategy begins, with a host of unsung programmes that really might rescue children from failure.   To promote these, why not call this paper "Our Nation's Children" or some such? Leave marriage, cohabiting and single parents alone. Be bold in mocking politicians who preach to empty pulpits. Make a virtue of high-spending practical policy over Tory sermonising that thinly camouflages their planned cuts in all such children's projects. It would be good to hear this draft was ditched long ago: of course no family values nonsense will mar the group's new paper on children.