Alan Milburn announces grandly that there is to be a new "concordat" drawn up with the private health sector. What is a "concordat"? The dictionary calls it a treaty, implying it's between enemies. But what remains entirely unclear is whether the government regards private medicine as friend or foe. Ever since Bevan fudged it back in 1948, the NHS has writhed in uncomfortable cohabitation. It has never declared whether private practice is a leech on its back, a partner of sorts or a competitor. This concordat - prematurely announced since nothing is agreed - will define it no better than heretofore. In fact it will muddy the waters yet further.  What will it say? It will lay down national principles for local agreements, including possibly national tariffs on cost per operation. It will see that health authorities get value for money, highest quality of care and "no detriment to the NHS". Clear as mud. Currently the NHS buys a little, but only very little private treatment for its patients - some 30,000 operations last year. (The NHS did 6.5m.) The supposed purpose of the concordat is to increase the number of NHS patients treated in private hospitals in a blitz on waiting lists, especially in winter months when surgery lists get backed up by flu victims filling surgical beds. It makes sense, they say. So long as the above conditions are all adhered to, waiting lists will be cut, some patients will have a nice time in posh clinics, everyone's happy.   But the relationship between the private and the public sector can never be that clearcut as long as most private doctors are also NHS consultants. The balance between the amount of work they do in one or other sector can shift according to perverse incentive. It is the third condition on the concordat that will defy definition - "no detriment to the NHS". It's been proven time and again that surgeons with long waiting lists already do the most private practice. If there is suddenly more work available in the local private hospital there's a risk some doctors will reduce their NHS contracts and scuttle down the road to treat the very same people for twice the fee.   What might happen if the NHS draws closer to the private sector? Imagine a health authority strikes a good deal with a local private clinic to do 100 hips a year. It goes well. It becomes 200 hips. Insidiously over the years more and more doctors and nurses do more and more sessions in the private hospital and the work in the local NHS hospital dries up. Suddenly the private hospital is the only local hip provider and they can more or less name their price. It becomes like the European system where most state-paid work is provided by the private sector - and unit prices are hugely higher. That is why it matters - not for NHS trade union or ideological reasons but because   one of the great (and unsung) successes of the NHS is that it has kept control of costs. It may be cash-starved but it spends its money far better than other western countries because it controls it all. If too much work moves permanently into the private sector, the NHS risks losing financial control of the system.   The extent to which the "concordat" remains a peculiar and ill-defined beast lies here. The Independent Health Association - with whom the treaty is being negotiated - said yesterday, "Yes! We want to move over to the European model. That's where we are going. Ask people in Germany or France and they are very happy to be treated in private hospitals. The government needs to mobilise our provision."   But does the government really want to incur European costs? Is the European model what the government has in mind? "Of course not!" say government sources. "It may be what the private sector wants, but that's not what we are going to agree." (So much for a concordat.) It won't happen, they say, because the "value for money" caveat means NHS hospitals can only buy private treatment at the same price as it would cost in the NHS . On average, private operations cost twice as much. So far the private sector has offered a few loss-leader deals, using up spare capacity for a few operations at more or less cost. But they couldn't run a significant business that way, paying doctors twice as much, yet charging the NHS the same. Private medicine is tiny - 10,000 beds compared with the NHS's 200,000. This is piffling, marginal, insignificant.    So why the big announcement and the big word "concordat"? Tell it not in Gath, it's a bit of a political game, they whisper. Shoot the Tory fox. Call their bluff. Remember how last winter the Tories said there'd be no crisis if we used the private sector? This shows we're not ideological, we'll work with anyone to cut waiting lists if they offer the same NHS price. Let the private sector and their Tory advocates put up, or shut up. Add in this: when we cut NHS waiting time to virtually nothing, once the national plan delivers a bright, modern service, no one will use the private sector. It'll be dead in the water - bar a few visiting Arabs.   However, Labour may never reach that nirvana unless they build a wall between the private and the state sector, instead of forging concordats. The best way would be to buy out the consultants, pay them more - most deserve it - and make them choose between NHS and private work.   Tony Blair plainly regards this concordat as an ideological talisman. He wants both sectors in his big tent. But it isn't that simple and it's not an old Labour class envy thing. Unless he grasps the way private practice fuels the length of NHS waiting lists, he will never reach his no-waiting goal. He should consider the many other ways private medicine coils itself around the NHS. In Surrey, some 30% of hips and even 20% of coronary bypass operations are performed privately. And yet Surrey NHS gets the same per capita government money as poor areas. Shouldn't it be factored into   NHS funding? Due to private practice, the population in Hampstead is greatly more likely to be hospitalised than the far sicker population in Tower Hamlets. (Though Hampstead may be suffering hundreds of needless operations - another perverse incentive in private medicine). What does the concordat have to say about these things?    The political question is this: was it worth upsetting and angering vast numbers of NHS staff with this concordat? Was it worth angering Labour's heartlands with such talk - just to prove yet again that the Tory policy is rubbish? Come the election, voters are unlikely to credit cheap Tory jibes about waiting lists. Voters can see how 20   years of critical underfunding have left the NHS limping. Everywhere you look it's all held together with sticking plaster by underpaid people.   The great fear now is that all this hype about the national plan will raise expectations which cannot be quickly met. The NHS is not going to be modern in a hurry. A reminder of reality: yesterday I was stopped in a Lambeth street by an old lady who asked what day it was. No, she wasn't in the least confused, she just couldn't see. She'd been waiting for a cataract operation for a year. One day in a clinic, NHS or private would give her back her life.