The hawks and doves are fighting it out inside the government and the Department of Health. Is there to be all-out war against the God-like consultants, locking horns with the monarchs of the wards? Or is it to be peace, emollience and sweet inducements? The BMA and the Royal Colleges have been outraged by some of the language Milburn, Blair and others have used. But they don't know if it's for real. Indeed the government itself hasn't decided.  Some want a fight. They want consultants under managers' thumbs and properly accounting for every hour of their day. Calmer, wiser heads point to the dismal record of governments who have tried to take on the doctors in the past. Voters always side with doctors (top of the popularity league) against politicians (bottom, alongside journalists). However outrageous the doctors' protection of their Spanish practices, they always make it look as if wicked politicians and managers are "damaging patient care" if anyone lays a finger on their fiefdom. Barbara Castle ran at them headlong - and was trounced. Kenneth Clarke can hardly have felt himself a winner. In an election year, who wants to risk it?   But remarkably radical ideas are in the air. Here is just one startling scheme. It is being hotly debated within the national plan committees and it is hinted at every time Blair or Milburn talk darkly of "perverse incentives" in the system. They are referring to surgeons' perverse incentive   to keep their own waiting lists long, deliberately fuelling demand for their private practice. Even the head of the Royal College of Surgeons admitted to me that some consultants "do capitalise on the length of their waiting lists". So the radical idea is to separate the NHS from the private sector for the first time since Bevan was forced to give in on the issue.   All NHS consultants would be barred from doing private practice and would have to choose between the two. They would have to give all their time unequivocally to their NHS work, or leave it altogether. It sounds draconian and terrifyingly socialist. Can this really be the Third Way? But the surprising answer insiders are coming up with is that it could and should be done. Most important of all, and what makes it a Third Way answer, is that it could be done without declaring war on the doctors. It could gain the overwhelming support of most consultants - at a cost.   Here's the plan. Only 6,000 out of the 21,000 NHS consultants have any private practice at all, or any prospect of any. Many of those 6,000 have only a little private work on the side: a smallish handful of big players do a vast quantity. The radical idea is to offer a large salary increase - somewhere between £20,000 and £30,000 - to buy consultants out of their private practice altogether. The argument inside the department is between some parsimonious officials who think the money could be paid just to surgeons and anaesthetists (98% of surgeons have some private practice). But that would be a recipe for full-scale war - and rightly too. Why should the psycho-geriatricians and other Cinderellas with no private practice lose out yet again to the glamorous specialisms? Peter Hawker, head of the consultants committee of the BMA, warns the resentment would be so deep it would spill out onto the wards. "Insane," he rightly says.   No, buying out the consultants has to mean all of them - fat and thin cats alike. Bevan complained about having to stuff their mouths with gold. But by present day standards NHS consultants are not highly paid. The maximum basic salary for an NHS consultant is £63,000, not a fortune considering how hard most work and 10 years of gruelling training. (If the national plan does all it promises, many will be working a lot harder, too.) Some super headteachers now command £70,000 for less training: it's time the public sector, from top talent down to minimum wage, rewarded its people better.   However, some fat cat surgeons threaten that many will walk away from the NHS, as they earn so much more outside it. Waiting lists would soar, despite Milburn's promise of many more con sultants. But could the surgeons walk out? It's an extraordinary sign of the changing times that Barry Jackson, president of the mighty Royal College of Surgeons, does not put himself into immediate opposition to these plans.   Not long ago the college would have exploded with fury. Quite the contrary. It is Jackson himself who points out that any surgeons who abandoned the NHS would find themselves with slim pickings. "I've known many surgeons with excellent private practices take early retirement and expect to continue with their private work. But once they've left the NHS, it dries up quickly and many have been very disappointed men. GPs soon stop referring patients to surgeons not attached to a good NHS hospital."    Peter Hawker, the consultants' trade union leader at the BMA, does not reject the idea either. "I keep hearing about it, but it hasn't been put to us yet. We'd be happy to talk to the government about it," he says. After all, the vast majority of consultants would gain hugely, and only a tiny minority would lose out.   It could be done. Paying £30,000 to all 21,000 consultants would cost £630m - well worth the money. Some officials say that if the national plan succeeds in abolishing all waiting lists in the NHS for ever, private practice will wither away anyway, so why bother to buy the doctors out? But others say the waiting list problem will   never be solved until there is absolute separation of private practice from NHS work. The perverse incentive for surgeons to keep their lists long is just too great.   If the government is considering fairness and equal opportunity, demolishing private practice within the NHS would be a good signal to send out. David Hinchcliffe, chair of the commons health select committee, says what upsets patients languishing on long waiting lists is being told they could be operated on by the same man in the same hospital tomorrow, if they have a few thousand pounds.   The select committee is about to launch a raucous and vigorous investigation of the consultants' NHS contract - which is in mid-renegotiation. Hinchcliffe is likely to push for all manner of punitive actions against any "arrogant", "God-like", "king" consultants found lining their pockets while doing less than they might for the NHS. His very old Labour blast will strengthen the government's arm as it proposes many radical changes to the way doctors and nurses work.   Blair and Milburn may yet surprise party critics by being the first Labour government to succeed where Bevan failed. Barbara Castle tried to drive private beds out of the NHS by force and she failed disastrously. Now there's the money to do it, buying out private practice could succeed where brute force failed. The great majority of consultants are likely to welcome it with open arms.