An extraordinary and revolutionary plan is brewing. As the NHS "national plan" takes shape, the government is on the verge of making a pledge to abolish queueing in the NHS within the next five years. It would be a pledge as surprising and unexpected as the ones promising full employment and the abolition of child poverty. A hot debate is in progress, with the Department of Health and Number 10 determined to go for it, and the Treasury digging in its heels. Understandably, the Treasury fears such a promise would be a constant gun to its head, forcing unknown sums for health year after year if the target looked as if it might not be met. But advocates of the pledge are growing. It would become the big idea the NHS national plan has been searching for until now.  The prime minister is firmly in the driving seat of the national plan process, spending a great deal of his time each week on it. He is pushing ahead with this waiting list idea - once he's sure it can genuinely be done. What the prime minister wants he is likely to get, whatever the Treasury says. Visitors to him these days are regaled with detailed information about the myriad inefficiencies the NHS has lived with since its inception. He's inclined to say: "Did you know some surgeons only do three operations a week, while others do 30? Did you know 40% of people referred to hospital outpatients never needed a consultant at all?"   The more the teams work away at the national plan, the clearer it becomes that unblocking the bottle-necks depends on doctors and nurses breaking down old professional demarcations.   Today a census inside the entire NHS will ask each of the day's 1m patients and the 1m NHS staff to write down their "top three things that would make the NHS better". The results will be collated by a private firm within two weeks and handed to the 120-strong national plan committee and its all-inclusive task forces of NHS professionals. The government already knows what patients will say. Recent private polling reveals they say it's waiting, waiting and waiting, especially for cancer treatments and GP appointments. Dirty wards and inedible hospital food rank high, but waiting comes first, second and third.   Could it be done? One of the chief promoters of the idea is Stephen Thornton, head of the NHS confederation. In five years? Easy, he says, it could take less than five years if the national plan is radical enough when it's published in July. What would it take? First, abandon the nonsensical target of cutting total waiting lists, one of Labour's worst manifesto mistakes. Who cares how many others wait, all that matters is how long they wait. Waiting time will be cut at first to a six-month maximum. After that everyone will get a guaranteed booked appointment in three months - and that effectively counts as abolition, in line with most of Europe. (So   long as cancer and urgent cases are dealt with at once, others should be left a little while before operating as conditions can improve or patients change their minds.) How could it be done? It needs a radical break with the past and total restructuring of the professions.   One idea is to create new surgery units, with highly paid surgeons contracted for nothing but routine waiting list operations, with no danger of operations cancelled or beds purloined: emergency cases go to other units. New sub-consultant grades would do simpler operations, something the BMA strongly resists. The danger is that when waiting lists fall, GPs just refer more borderline cases to hospitals, sometimes with vague referral notes asking a consultant to "please advise on this case". That will have to stop. The new primary care groups into which all GPs are now grouped to purchase hospital services for their patients will have to control who they refer, conducting their own lab tests first and hiring their own specialists for minor operations, cutting down hospital referrals.   Hanging over all this,   though, is the consultants' contract which has been in slow renegotiation for a year and a half. Tomorrow the BMA consultants committee meets in London for its annual conference, where the vexed question of the contract will be hotly debated. If the government is lucky there may be a new division between the surgeons (who have much private practice) and the majority who work very hard almost exclusively within the NHS. The waiting list promise will require deft handling of the doctors: no use precipitating rebellion. Yet something has to be done about the absurdity of the present contract that allows key surgeons to spend too much time on private work despite virtually full NHS pay. Can the government walk the tightrope of reforming the contract, getting more work out of the underperforming doctors and yet keep them enthused about the national plan?   The shocking survey by John Yates published in the Health Service journal will strengthen the government's arm - and may incense many other NHS consultants. It found supposedly full-time orthopaedic surgeons on average conducted only 6.4 operations a week taking just seven hours. They do fewer than 10 years ago, though the numbers of orthopaedic surgeons has nearly doubled. They control their long waiting lists: as a result hips, knees and other bones are the most sought after private operations. The report concludes no more orthopaedic surgeons be appointed until   existing ones increase their NHS work to at least four sessions a week lasting three and a half hours each. Hardworking consultants without private practice are growing increasingly restive at being tarred with the same brush. Divide and rule may be the government strategy, but it could be a hard battle. Abolishing waiting lists will kill most private practice.   When the prime minister announced the largest increase the NHS has ever had, many insiders saw it as the last desperate chance for the NHS. Every newspaper (bar the Guardian and Mirror) was openly advocating privatisation in one form another. On television Tory shadow health minister Philip Hammond advocated an NHS for emergencies only, with private insurance for everything else. As average incomes rise fast, seductive brochures for private hospitals might woo too many people away, leaving the NHS a poor service for the poor. That is why Blair went for the things patients care about most, creating NHS Direct, high street clinics and booked operation appointments. If waiting is really abolished then the NHS will be saved. However, it is such an astonishing leap there's a danger that it will simply not be believed, in the same way that Labour's sceptical heartlands seem to disregard those other radical promises on child poverty and full employment. Time to abandon third way mumble and let Labour rhetoric match its most radical plans.