When do you start to worry seriously about the health of the NHS? When top treasury officials go around publicly saying that persuading more people to take out private insurance is part of the solution. When erstwhile left of centre social policy gurus write pieces extolling private practice in the Daily Mail. When the Tories think that praising private health is a winner not a catastrophic loser. (But what do they know?) When even Labour's Lord Winston surprisingly starts to talk up private funding.  Suddenly everywhere you go the word is that the NHS is fading fast. Sad but inevitable. Post-war child of rationing and shortage, people just won't put up with its dilatory shabbiness any more. Tales are swapped of A and E queues, seedy mixed-sex wards, exhausted doctors and the lack of calm or privacy. The stampede is on. However often it is pointed out that on every measure the NHS treats more people and treats them better than ever before, few believe it. Well, they say, it's still not good enough - and that is also the truth.   It's a truth Tony Blair knows and it's why he promised a revolutionary increase in health spending the like of which the NHS has never seen. But this must be the worst-spun good news story in a very long time. How can the government commit itself irrevocably -   everyone agrees there's no going back - to spending so much yet still get the worst possible press on health? Bad news management, or what?   It looks like just plain chaos. Treasury officials are saying quite openly that the target for health spending the prime minister set cannot be reached unless we also hugely increase the private sector to bridge the gap with the EU. Gordon Brown seems to be sulking in his tent instead of coaxing maximum good-news value out of what he will have to spend whether he likes it or not. It may make nonsense of his Comprehensive Spending Review but he could at least get some credit by loud public boasting about it. Tony Blair himself has let people think this was some panicky slip of the tongue on the Frost programme (which it wasn't). Alastair Campbell grumbles that he never did use the word "aspiration" to water down his master's pledge, but where is his campaign to blazon the good news from every hospital rooftop?   Politics are mainly reported as sport. The political commentators' game here is to calculate whether Blair fumbled and dropped the ball when he claimed a huge increase of 5% more a year would hit the EU health average. Game analysts plunged into the meta-complexities of a shifting goal ridden with variables. How do you measure the real EU average? What counts as some countries' compulsory tax and   what a voluntary private contribution? What if a well-funded NHS leads to less private insurance making that EU target harder to reach, despite great success? To name that target may have been an unnecessary political own-goal. But that's all angels on pins game-playing. What does it matter?:    All that matters is whether or not in the real world the NHS will blossom as a result of all this new money. Although it has improved, none the less it has steadily declined relative to general living standards. Now average incomes are expected to rise sharply by 30% in 10 years, can the NHS keep up? Education may be a more important priority - but we can't afford to choose between these two. If the NHS were let slip because education matters more in the long run, Labour might not still be there to control what happens in that long run. (Fewer households have kids in school that use the NHS.) If the NHS can't offer prompt treatment in bright clinics with obliging staff who don't look more miserably tired than their patients, people   will take their cheque books to the private sector.   Good, say top treasury officials. Good, say the Tories. Good, says Lord Winston. But bad says any health economist with any understanding of private health finance. Doctors in the private sector are paid 10 times more per hour than in the NHS. Private management costs are far higher, with the added bureaucracy of individual insurance and billing. Management of cost control in private treatment is non-existent with no oversight of needless treatments doctors sell to private patients. The private sector poaches and adds to the serious shortage of nurses and doctors instead of relieving pressure in the NHS. Fifty percent more cancer and heart specialists will come on stream soon. Why give any incentive to send them into the private sector where they will charge so much more for the same work?   New research from Bristol university shows that wherever doctors move into the private sector they create the demand as they go, not vice versa. Hardly surprising since they also control demand through their own NHS waiting lists. The Audit Commission tells the obvious truth that doctors who do more in the private sector do less in the NHS.   No one has ever accused this prime minister of being overly ideological about private/public provision. After all 31 new hospitals are (alas) being built under PFI by the private sector. So why is he   adamant that extra private insurance is no answer to NHS failings? For purely pragmatic reasons. Any tax break incentive for private insurance spends a huge dead weight sum on nothing, and anything above that is badly spent compared with what it would buy in the NHS. Health authorities may sometimes buy a few hundred hips from a local private hospital. But how much more of that would lead the NHS to rely on the private sector? More doctors would soon transfer over to do the same work for 10 times more pay and private prices would rise uncontrollably.   The NHS is not quite on a respirator, but this is the last chance for a universal service. If, by the election after next all this extra money it doesn't bump it into the 21st century, to match private sector comfort and convenience, the NHS idea will be dead. Too many average earners will be privately insured to care what becomes of a rump service for the old and poor. Blair is so determined to stop that happening that he is prepared to warp all other spending. The primrose path of private insurance leads to just one result: everyone ends up paying more yet getting less value than they do now. When a Portillo-led Tory party gallops towards the polls in 2006, the NHS has to be working brilliantly as never before or else the Tory lie that private is always best will win the day, to the loss of rich and poor alike.