This is not another old sticking plaster. This is something never seen before. It is the first commitment ever to give the health service what it needs and deserves. Just as Tony Blair astounded his critics last year with his pledge to abolish child poverty, so he has knocked the wind out of every health critic with his pledge on NHS spending. Gobsmacked, said one. The BMA is demanding a precise interpretation of Blair's words, but even the lowest figure suggests a real increase of one quarter more. That's not a step-change, it's a revolution - and no amount of finessing the fine print will ever let Labour off: they must now hit EU average health spending in five years.  Ever since Attlee savagely cut Aneurin Bevan's money to launch the service, the NHS started out on the back foot. Bevan even promised NHS needs would shrink as the backlog of ill-health was cured. But soaring costs and demands kept the service struggling to keep up with an ageing population, new technology and now a new generation of drugs. Despite above inflation money every year, it hasn't had enough to show visible, tangible improvement, to prove what good value voters get for the low taxes they pay.   How sick is the NHS? Nothing like as bad as the past two weeks' news would have you believe. It is difficult to take the pulse of this huge, patchy beast, but almost any measure shows continuous improvement, treating more people more reliably with   more transparent medical results. Tory health reforms improved accountability, while their patients' charter cut waiting times and made the NHS more consumer-aware. Labour has improved on the best elements of these. Best of all, the new National Institute of Clinical Effectiveness is screening drugs and treatments to spread the most effective practice evenly across the NHS. League tables now help weed out black spots where treatments fall below average.   But all this underlying improvement was too slow and too invisible. The NHS never kept up with public demand. Low tax decades left it trailing behind private affluence, shabby and slow compared with a trip to Ikea or Disneyland. That is why Tony Blair rightly demands the best in those things patients notice most - booked appointments, walk-in GP services, NHS Direct and refurbished A and E departments with no waits and no trolleys. Misled by most of what they read, or by scary documentaries empty of analysis (BBC just as guilty), how is the public to know how good or bad the NHS really is?   There will never be a time under any system in the world where health does not provide journalists with plentiful horror stories, true or false. Interestingly, the polls show how the most fit who rarely use the NHS rate it lowest, while frequent users rate it highest: rumour is stronger than reality.   The anatomy of an NHS panic is a curious thing. As a veteran of many outbreaks,   this is how they work: they start in the post-new year news vacuum, coinciding with the annual "flu crisis" - usually an artifact, also conveniently close to the end of the financial year when traditionally hospitals used ostentatiously to close down wards to protest about running out of money. This time, on January 7, it was the man in Hereford shunted round several hospitals who died 24 hours later. His outspoken surgeon protested publicly and sent up the news flares. Never mind that it later turned out to be human error and not NHS shortage (the ambulance failed to take him to the nearest hospital where a bed was waiting for him).   Certainly the woman who had her operation cancelled four times was monstrously treated (yet experts murmur under their breath that her cancer was almost certainly non-survivable anyway). Never mind the subtleties, these cases fly like the wind. The timely words of Lord Winston gave added kick to the usual cacophony of NHS winter shroud waving (though an IVF specialist may not really know about winter crises among the old).   However these regular   outbursts of NHS embarrassment for the government of the day don't take root or force government action unless there is an element of truth in them. In 1987, when deaths at a Birmingham heart hospital sparked a furore, the NHS was indeed in genuine trouble. John Moore's disastrous cuts had lead the heads of the mighty royal colleges to call on Downing Street in a formidable delegation. That led to the great Tory reforms - and more money. So now, again, Labour's two-year financial squeeze, though far less severe, lends a dose of truth to the partly fanciful reporting of the present state of the NHS.   There were plenty who warned Labour back in 1997 that a two-year freeze would inevitably lead to a public explosion. NHS staff are under intolerable pressure from too many years of forcing them to work harder through "productivity" cuts: they easily can and do walk with their feet to get better paid jobs elsewhere. Most doctors work very long, hard hours, with many committees and much paperwork. Beds are too full all year round, so any slight crisis means trolleys in corridors. If patients have to wait a week to see GPs, we need more doctors. Some services, like mental health, have always been calamitously underfunded.   What now? Not all NHS problems spring from lack of money - but money will make all the difference. There may be enough beds, but many are blocked with old people for lack of good (and far cheaper) nursing   home beds or care at home. Better community care will matter as much as better hospitals. Will managers make sure doctors cut waiting lists, when private practice is such an incentive to keep them long? The unions need to be fought on local pay rates: it does cost more to hire a nurse in London than in Blackburn. The unions need to be listened to on conditions and hours to make NHS careers flexible, attractive and progressive.   But the main lesson of this last scare - and why Tony Blair was right to intervene so dramatically - is that the NHS has new and more ferocious enemies barking at its door. The private health lobbies and many in their pay are among them. It was essential that Tony Blair should send the whole Tory press, with their scares and campaigns about "Britain's third world wards" creeping away with their tails between their legs. There never was any problem about the NHS funding mechanism. All it required was the political will. The NHS, for all its miserly frugality, is rated the best value for money in the world. Paying for it out of general taxation is the most economical, fair and least bureaucratic way. All it needed was a lot more money, which it now has. Labour cannot backslide on this, whatever the future economic circumstances, whatever its equally strong promises on poverty, education and transport. And it might take raising more tax.