Let's imagine - oh blissful imagining! - a golden morning next summer as Beckham's last-minute free kick wins England the World Cup. Wild euphoria and rejoicing. Somewhere in the depths of the Department of Transport and Local Government, a special adviser reaches for her computer keyboard and emails colleagues: "It's a very good day to get out anything we want to bury." Well, of course. Spin of this kind isn't new. It is as old as politicians in a jam. Proclaim bright triumphs from the rooftops and slip out the garbage via the back door. Nobody would think of disciplining such wide-awake lateral thinking; on the contrary, it's what these advisers are there for. And if her email leaked to the press? Then pursue, under cover of darkness, the "disloyal civil servant" who yakked to the press.  Is that scenario - however pavilioned in codes and pieties - remotely shocking? Not at all. Welcome to Spin City and the West Wing. So what, precisely, did Jo Moore do wrong on the day, the "very good day", that the twin towers exploded? She's contractually bound to advise about the "effective presentation" of government policies - which can, on occasion, mean trying not to present them.   How could anyone, any replica of a human being, sit in a Whitehall office on that awful afternoon with the TV turned on and think about sliding out new details on councillors' pay or the wider distrait of broken rails? Where's the common sense or the humanity? What kind of society have we become, that our bunkers of governance have become staffed by such people? Fair enough. But a spasm of revulsion, not an application of principle. Jo Moore did what she thought was her job. The difficulty with her case isn't that it reveals a crass manipulator or blinkered control-freak at work in a supposedly ethically purified system. It is that yet again the system stinks - and is shown to stink.  This is not, as a matter of fairness, just a Tony Blair problem. The system had putrefied long before he came to Downing Street. But the disasters are happening most visibly on his watch: and the dung, by design, lies piled on his own doormat.  Governments need special advisers, but where do they fit? They are civil servants paid from the public purse, which means that they're bound by the civil service   code and thus responsible to the civil service commissioners for their conduct. But they are also the creatures of individual ministers, appointed by them and governed by "model contracts" which outline their non-impartial, non-objective duties. They are therefore embraced by the quite separate ministerial code of conduct whose final determination lies on the prime minister's desk.  The cat's cradle of confusion never shrinks. After the sixth report of the Neill committee of standards in public life almost two years ago, there is also a third and (partially) separate code for special advisers which, amongst other things, spells out lines of media briefing command between temporary spinners and full-time information officers. Where does that enforcement buck stop? Maybe with the cabinet secretary. It depends on particular cases, how they emerge into the light, how far ministers were or weren't involved.  Back to Ms Moore, to her lousy email and then to her subsequently reported row with the department's oddly impermanent permanent communications director. What happens? A newspaper prints her email. She and Byers, holder of her model contract, have a white-faced meeting. He decides not to sack but "admonish" her. But meanwhile - because of the political stink - Downing Street is fast into the action. The prime minister, in so far as he's in the country and not asleep, is "standing by" Mr Byers and therefore Jo Moore.  Such staunch support, now embellished by the hope that it's time to "move on", supposedly continues. We'll see this week as disgusted backbenchers and their committees stride into action. The bleak flaw with the whole shambolic edifice, however, is already apparent. The judge and jury in this case - Mr Blair and his own Number 10 special advisers - have already spoken. Steve and Jo are stupid but innocent, OK? The codes are useless because the ultimate custodians of them are immediately out front doing what politicians in a jam - like Major over Aitken or Blair himself over Mandelson - always do: covering their or their colleagues' backs, loyal or hapless.  "The precise application of the [ministerial] code to the prime minister is not entirely apparent," as Lord Neill's sixth report plangently observed. The flaw. Over and, balefully, foolishly, self-destructively, out.