A prime member of that most cherished, government-sanctified species, the American tourist with big bucks to spend, came back from the New Forest a few days ago. "How was it?" I asked. "Disgusting," he said. "You mean all the fear and disinfectant and funeral pyres?" "Oh no, that was all right. It was just that I'd forgotten how disgusting the weather is here."Pause there, among the frantic wittering. Up to 2m Brits - a record - jet out this Easter to the sun. They are somehow traitors. The Scottish tourism minister who went to Italy for his break is certainly knee-deep in haggis lasagne. Newspaper reporters - six from the Telegraph, alone - fan out across the nation eating in deserted restaurants and sleeping in lonely beds. Headlines talk of "cash lifelines" for "devastated tourist industries". We might be watching a particularly blood-boltered episode of ER.  This pulsating dispatch comes to you from a natural front line, from Manchester. It is raining (as it has been raining for most of the past three months). It is raining in the Peak District and the Lake District. It is cold and it is miserable. I have bought a dozen pairs of socks in TK Maxx and eaten decently tender squid in an Italian restaurant. My foot and my mouth.  Meanwhile, in London, harassed ministers plot their responses to the sudden crisis of tourism. Mr Blair wants cash hand-outs, Mr Brown hates anyone but himself handing out "his" cash: Mr Meacher touts an ad hoc bank holiday in September for extra spending purposes, Mr Blair prefers a ninth regular break - maybe Trafalgar Day - every October. Nobody acknowledges the awful truth. Our weather is lousy, our footpaths - closed or open -  are quagmires. None but the hardy few would, in any case, be venturing out through this frigid murk. We are in denial about our weather.  How can that possibly be? We seem, from mindless habit, to talk of little else. Our forecasters, after the debacle of 1987, are the glummest warners in the world. And yet, as tourism supposedly catches pneumonia in early April, it is the sensible souls who pack their suntan lotion and head for Luton or Stansted who are dubbed deserters in this new battle of Britain. Bravery means remaining behind in the rain and watching John Prescott declare some stile fit to pass.  Why on earth should anyone desert Los Angeles (17C and sunny) for this? Or Washington (23C)? Or New York (18C)? Why on earth stay here if you can get to Malaga, a sunny 20C? Diseased animals don't help, of course, any more than a holiday rail network back in the doldrums or the odd bomb from the Real IRA: but let's be real about the problem in turn. For all our ritual introspection, we delude ourselves about our own weather. We pretend - fatally - that it doesn't matter. We start the cricket season any second now and spend its first month in the pavilion. We have the opportunity to put a roof over Wimbledon's centre court and walk away.  An extra bank holiday in October, as the leaves fall and the first storms of encroaching winter come, is pathetically more of the same. Bank holidays in Britain are   anyway statistically doomed to frustration - damp opportunities for the burgeoning service industries (including online banks) to serve and the contracting manufacturing industries to go shopping. Perhaps we have so few (16th out of 17 western European countries) because they're such a desultory ordeal? Time to think again.  European comparisons - as cited again last week by the Fabian Society - are meaningless in any case, for we do not have European weather. We aren't Spain or Greece or Italy (or even the mainland centre as the continent heats up). The Swedes and the Finns will look forward to more certain sun than we can. We can be cold and overcast any day of the year and when forecasters predict a glowing summer - as they did last month - the only evidence they cite under pressure is that we haven't had one since 1997.  Tony Blair supposedly believes in joined-up thinking. Let's tie a few ends together. His education department is pondering a supposed revolution in the school year, four shorter terms interspersed by shorter holidays. This is an effort to match standards of European or American achievement. But both Europe and America - the true comparison - don't go that way at all. They have far shorter breaks at Easter and Christmas and pack up for 10 or 12 weeks in June. Their years are geared to reality. They follow the sun. We eschew reality. We truncate what passes, statistically, for our best chance of summer, and load in redundant weeks of chill dyspepsia after Christmas or through the sodden ides of Easter. And if hoteliers complain, we toss them a soggy October bun.  It defies common sense. Think of Scotland's embattled tourism minister. He may be as patriotic as they come, but there was fog in Glasgow this weekend. Come June, though, come the finest weeks of Scottish weather, the schools will be full of exam takers and the factories whirring with industry. At the very best time to be out, the Scots will be in.   Think more closely about the complaining restaurant owners and hotel keepers. They insist on opening for ludicrously long periods by European standards. Because we have no defined holiday season, they potter along growing grim through the sodden spring or appalling autumn, watching staff pick their nails. That, again, is not the European way, where most openings fit a defined span and staff from Paris or Madrid come down with their clients to open up. My local medieval village in Spain has 14 restaurants and no grocer's shop; none of the restaurants - even at 24C - dreams of opening through the week until June.  What do we have to offer? History, culture, rather better food - and the shimmering chimera of the occasional perfect day. Those are our tourist bankers; they have little to do with footpaths and much more to do with the state of the American or Japanese economy. The moment, in a redundant lather of "Backing Britain", we lose track of that is the moment we become utterly dotty.  One of the most fascinating books of the year so far is Queen Victoria and the Rise of the Riviera by Michael Nelson (IB Tauris, £25). It shows, in revealing detail, how the most British queen of an Indian empire - which she never visited - would slope off summer after summer to the warmth of Nice, and how the opinion leaders of her realm dutifully followed. Queen Vic helped invent international tourism, Britain's gift to the world: she was the trailblazer for Tony and Cherie. Perhaps she'd have fancied Antibes this benighted Easter.