It is the case of the dog who is still clearing his throat. We are back - the ides of May 3 - in one of our periodic paroxysms over sleaze, in the season of Vazillations; and there is silence at the centre of our defences. Sir Nigel Wicks has nothing to say. How could he? His feet are barely under the desk yet. New sleazebusters start here. Sir Nigel (in case you missed his appointment a few weeks ago) is the third chairman of the committee on standards in public life. He succeeds Lord Neill of Bladen (who succeeded Lord Nolan) and he is interestingly different. Nolan was a distinguished judge; Neill was a distinguished lawyer/ academic; Wicks is the supreme civil service insider.  He was a private secretary to Harold Wilson and Jim Callaghan in Downing Street. He was economic minister in the Washington embassy and our man at the World Bank and IMF. He was Margaret Thatcher's principal private secretary, chairman of the European Community monetary committee and Gordon Brown's point-man through Group of Seven meetings. He was second permanent secretary at the Treasury.  You don't, in public life, come much more influential than that. Wicks was a powerful man in the most powerful ministry, an ultimate mover and shaker. When Tony Blair nominated him as the defender of standards, he seemed to say something important - that the job itself was as important as ever, perhaps more so, that trust   and confidence in the system remained vital.  But note the change of perspective. Nolan, summoned in extremis by John Major, was the judicial outsider. Neill followed that pattern. Both knew about public life from a (very decent) seat in the stalls. They came in from the cold to examine and codify conduct which seemed to have fallen into slack disrepair. Wicks operates from a totally separate standpoint. He has always been in the kitchen. He either thinks it still an honourable place, from personal experience - or he senses the grime round the stove, the dirty washing left in the sink.  Let's assume, with some confidence, that he belongs to the honourable tendency. He hasn't devoted three decades to propping up a rotten body politic. He still believes that, at root, most of the people he worked with, following most of the codes in place, were good administrators doing a good, selfless job. Of course, this doesn't mean that some things - and some men and women - don't go off the rails, or panic in a jam. But the essential task is reassurance, not doubt-clouded invigilation. The task is revealing the true world he knows, or thinks he knows, to a watching populace.  This is not, perhaps, so very different from the role Nolan and Neill came eventually to see for themselves. When Neill, 14 months ago, published his re-review of the committee's first five years, he hailed "great achievements" in raising ethical standards - and basked in   the opinion of the leader of the House, Margaret Beckett, who told him "that things are a great deal less fevered". But ... there is always a but. "The subject of conduct in public life can return to newspaper front pages and the public eye very rapidly."  Dismally true. Enter, in a fevered rush, Messrs Mandelson, Reid, Hinduja and Vaz (pursued by our old mate, Wafic Said). Public eyes open wide. Whether or not it changes election results - and the evidence is that it doesn't unless a reviled government is on the way out anyway - the issue of sleaze is back, and so are its handmaidens, cynicism and apathy. It would be wrong to declare seven years of toil gone to waste, but the headlines are still awful and yesterday's poll results still damning. If Sir Nigel Wicks believes in reassurance, he suddenly needs it by the tonne.   Pre-ballot blues? In part, naturally enough. Some of the current stuff is mere political putrescence. When Archie Norman delivers Asda memorial lectures on planning permission purity and puts the boot into Margaret and Mark Thatcher's moneyed mate, Wafic, he makes   himself ridiculous. Indeed, the Tories, prancing high on the platform built for them by Lord Ashcroft of Belize, are constantly ridiculous here. But that doesn't mean that the Hammond report on the Hindujas or the Filkin report on Keith Vaz (or even the sheepish privileges committee report on Dr John Reid) don't matter. They do, greatly. They are symptoms of reforming zeal running into the sands.  How, if you're Wicks, do you turn this tide? How do you and your team find a role at the heart of the action, as Lord Nolan once did? The committee stands at the apex of regulation. But, as we can see from the past few weeks, it can perilously easily drift into forgetfulness. Its chosen (or prescribed) modus operandi doesn't work any longer.  The idea, from the start, was to publish a long series of reports which could be the foundation stones for standards in dodgy areas (which others could police). Mission accomplished. Seven magisterial documents, moving from quango appointments to political advisers, have flowed forth. Yet what happens then? Sometimes the government acts. That's why we have election spending limits and a commission to police them at last. Sometimes nothing happens.  Only once has the committee tramped back across old ground. Sometimes it found grievous flaws (in the procedures of the privileges committee) and recommended change. Nothing happened. Sometimes it slid away from   obvious reform - on prime ministerial control of the code of conduct for ministers - and was painfully slow to realise its mistake.  Consider the cases causing current grief. Would Keith Vaz and his eager beaver solicitor have been quite so keen on slithery obfuscation if they'd had to deal, at the last, with a four-person core committee chaired by a high court judge? Would Elizabeth Filkin, gallantly punctilious, have been so let down? Would an ad hoc Sir Anthony Hammond have been pulled off a back shelf to spread his complacent Hinduja balm? Would Peter Mandelson have had a fairer deal - and Vaz a far terser, sterner one?  The problem is not what the Wicks team does next -honours appointments? European connections? - to some annual schedule. It is making sure that what isn't going right is, very publicly, put right. (Just watch the coming election spending debacle.)  Tony Blair called for Sir Nigel because the job still matters. Sir Nigel took it because he agreed. He must know already that prime ministers, ditching colleagues in a tizz or hanging on to them beyond reason, do democracy damage as well as themselves. He must know already that, whatever the weight of the allegations against him, Keith Vaz made a mockery of the procedures Nolan set in place. And he must know, too, that there can be no going forward without going back.