Stand on the last red, rocky outcrop of Pakistan territory at the end of the Khyber Pass: look down the winding road into Afghanistan. And what do you see on the plain below? A gigantic goods depot. Lorries by the hundred, parked for offloading. You see the imbecility of sanctions. There was a predictable flurry a few weeks ago when Robin Cook abandoned his (inevitably ethical) arms embargo against General Pervez Musharraf's fledgling regime. Here we were, after a handful of months, abandoning our righteous condemnation of the soldiery who had, yet again, crushed Pakistan democracy. Here we were, giving in. But this ban - more even than most such exercises - had been a charade of diplomacy.  The stark fact is that General Musharraf's men can never, will never, run short of guns. They have guns extruding from every arsenal: weapons showered on them by Uncle Sam through the long years of Afghan war, weapons by the million collected from the refugees and dealers of that war, weapons shipped by lorry down the highways from central Asia where the indigent former republics of the Soviet empire have leftover kit to sell, weapons trucked from China or across Iran from the factories of eastern Europe. An arms embargo? The MoD could take Gordon Brown's new billions and blow them overnight in the gun supermarkets of Khybermart.  Go out and make a futile gesture? Brother, this de funct embargo was the emperor of redundant gestures. It was a bad, sad joke. And yet, as it is lifted, we still wriggle with indignation. How can you relax sanctions when the cause of those sanctions remains unaddressed (and, indeed, Pakistan's elected prime minister begins a clutch of life sentences)? What kind of signal does that send? What does it tell the "world community" about our resolve?  These weren't questions on the agenda at Okinawa. TB doesn't even seem to have written one of his memos about them. Yet facing and answering them becomes imperative. Do sanctions "work"? Perhaps, very occasionally. They were one factor among many in South Africa's lurch to a better future. But do the sanctions currently imposed around the world show any such sign of working? To the contrary: they merely make some lousy scenes worse.  President Slobodan Milosevic is thinking of standing early for re-election this autumn. He wouldn't be thinking about that test - euro-referendum style - if he wasn't sure of winning. The early opposition rallies which followed the Kosovan war have faded into squabbling impotence. Milosevic is closing radio stations and locking up dissident journalists with all his old elan.  I have, at second hand, many contacts across the swathe of the president's critics inside Serbia, the men and women from all walks of life who hope one day to offer their country a better future. There are dozens of them. Not one - not a single one - believes that the west's continuing sanctions have any useful effect. Exactly the opposite. They all believe that these sanctions prolong Milosevic's rule. They oppress, depress and divide the forces of possible resistance - and turn ordinary people against them. They make life a barren struggle in which only acquiescence and despair grow. And, crucially, they hand the power of survival - access to food, goods and permits - to Milosevic's cronies.  Sanctions create a corrupt crony state. Sanctions undermine any residual rule of law. Sanctions breed fear and resignation in precisely the quarters they are meant to succour. We shouldn't be surprised about that. It is the abiding lesson of Saddam's Iraq a decade on. The old gangster may - just may - be dying of cancer, his sons preparing to stage their own succession revels; but the dictatorship lives and flourishes as usual, untouched by any liberalising breeze of change. The only change of a wasted, deluded decade has been the changings of the guard at UN mercy missions within Iraq as its commanders have departed in disgust at the starvation and death of innocent peasants and innocent children which sanctions have brought in train.  The miserable truth about such reflections, though, is not that they are the treacherous mutterings of some minority - but exactly the reverse. Everybody in polite political and diplomatic circles is prepared to shrug and write off sanctions in private. Wasn't that the rub for Milosevic: that he'd be left to languish in isolated autocracy while the countries of freedom near to him, the Bulgarias and Romanias, would prosper? But just go to the empty Danube and look at the blight that sanctions spread. Whatever happened to examples?  The moral difficulty now, the real problem of ethics, is that the imposers and maintainers of sanctions have no faith in them either. They recognise that these tools of the trade haven't undermined Saddam or Slobodan, but have kept them in place. We've done them a good turn, these formally designated war criminals; we've given them no choice but to hang on, then ensured that they can gather their cronies together and keep the lid on society jammed tight.  Good news for the Kurds or the marsh dwellers of Iraq? Good news for the millions of Serbs who want to be human again? Of course not. But - and here even the sagest diplomats gaze at their boots - what else is there to be done? This policy of "strength and resolve" can't be abandoned. We can't admit in public what we all acknowledge in private. That would be "weakness".  And so the old nostrums emerge almost of their own accord. Don't like Burma? Then chuck in more sanctions. Don't like Fiji? Here we go again. That doesn't mean that all sanctions, in all circumstances, are a waste of time. General Musharraf wouldn't take a ban on diplomatic travel lightly - nor yet a ban on Pakistan officers past and present visiting their European and American villas and watering holes for the summer. That would soon have the yelps starting. But meaningless sanctions, imposed by rote and continued long after their failure is manifest, are different. They are the embattled dictator's friend and the enemy of the innocent.  Dichotomy time. We preach freedom's catharsis through the freedom of the market - but we jettison that freedom when we try to confront autocracy. We put our trust in the people - except when they need our trust. In terms of hardship and futility, we ought to be rethinking sanctions now. We know that they are killing children by the hundreds of thousands in Iraq, but we daren't admit it. We know that they are the tyrant's best friend, but will not say so. Perhaps Philip Gould could see what one of his focus groups thinks. Then at least we might get sanctions on the agenda.