Demography is the secret driver that makes the world go around.When a society is young, it is vigorous, inquisitive and productive; when a society is old, it stagnates and slows down. As with an individual's experience of age, so with our wider society. If you want a cross-check on how any economy or society is likely to fare, examine its fertility and mortality rates - or at least so claims Harvard University's Professor David Bloom.   At one of the surprisingly large number of sessions here at the World Economic Forum in Davos devoted to demography in general and ageing societies in particular, Bloom rolled out his thesis. If you thought the economic miracle in east Asia in the 1960s and 1970s was due to high investment rates, exports to the US or determined use of state power to marshal and focus resources on industrialisation, think again. It was because east Asia's birth rate boomed.      Similarly, if you want to explain the continued indifferent performance of the mainland European economies and the current stagnation in Japan, look no further than the collapse of their birth rates. As these societies start to age, so they save more and consume less. They cling to redundant approaches to working and organising themselves for too long; the working population shrinks in proportion to the non-working population, so that it has to shoulder a growing 'burden' of tax. The economy becomes sclerotic; entrepreneurship dwindles; fewer risks are taken; demand slows down.    Meanwhile, it is the US's comparatively high birth rate that allegedly explains its superior economic performance. (Each US woman is having on average two children: 100 women need to have 210 children, a 'replacement rate' of 2.1, for any population to replace itself.) In Japan, the replacement rate is 1.3 and Germany 1.4; their populations are in headlong decline. But all the handicapping processes from which they suffer are reversed in the US - hence its risk-taking, its flexibility and dynamism. Indeed, high-saving, ageing Europe should be thankful it has the young, low-saving US to invest in.    Without a rising or high birth rate - Britain's women are only a bit more fertile than those in Germany and Japan, so that our replacement rate is a worrying 1.7, implying a falling population - the key building block for economic success and social vitality is not in place. No less an economist than former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers pronounced here that Old Europe's key problem was its low birth rate.    Moreover, the falling birth rates in parts of the developed world are beginning to be mirrored in the developing world. On current trends, China's population will have stopped growing in 2025, but with a similar pattern across the world - from Mexico to the Middle East - the world's population will have stabilised by 2070, according to the United Nations.    True, it will rise by another 50 per cent before it starts to decline - but a principal driver underpinning economic growth since humanity left the cave, a steadily rising population, is now likely to end in the foreseeable future. As Bloom and others warn, we are going to have engage in a wholesale rethink of how we organise ourselves economically and socially.    You don't need to be a demographic fundamentalist like Bloom to see that he may have a partial point. There wasn't a panellist at any of the sessions I attended who thought the trends were likely to be reversed by a sudden increase in women's readiness to have babies, even though every society massively subsidises the old in comparison to the support offered to bringing up children.   Urbanisation, contraception, rising female participation in the workforce, the celebration of smaller families in the media and the establishment of welfare states were all cited as undermining the rationale for high birth rates; above all, women themselves are no longer prepared to dedicate their lives to childbirth and rearing large families. The decline in the birth rate was a deep-seated trend, and even France's generous inducements to having large families were having only a marginal impact.    If we want to keep our populations stable, we are both going to have live longer ourselves - which we are doing - and accept more immigrants, at least for as long there are migrants available.    In Britain, according to tables prepared by the forum, we need British women to have another 166,000 babies a year if we are to stop the population from falling - or, if that doesn't happen, to more than double our immigration rate to maintain our numbers. We should be delighted to have had so many asylum seekers, but on current birth rates we need to welcome many more. We're not being over-run by immigrants; we need them.    But at least we're living longer - on average another year every decade - and the elderly are healthier. This poses a well known challenge to our pension system, and Davos turned the conventional wisdom on its head. As Peter Heller from the International Monetary Fund said, Britain's state pension is now inadequate and will have to be raised; it is meaner even than the US pension and uncertain private pensions are no substitute. Thus Britain has a special challenge; the same ageing population as other developed economies, but the most acute need of any to increase its state pension.    Given that we will do well even to maintain our population, raising the retirement age and asking more of the over-60s to work longer are thus inevitable. We will need to raise taxes and save more to provide for better pensions. We will need more women to work; marginalised groups, such as the disabled, will have to be pulled into the labour market. We will need the young to spend less time at university and higher education. And we will need to   encourage more immigration - or some combination of all of the above.    Will an ageing and stable population mean that our economy and society will stagnate?    Here I don't share either Bloom's demographic determinism or much of the pessimism about the future. Single-cause explanations are always suspect; the notion that the Asian miracle and the European slowdown were caused by changes in the birth rate alone are fanciful. America's replacement rate may be two, but France's is 1.7 - the same as our own. Is differential economic performance solely due to that tiny gap? If Europe adopted the US's cheap money policy and massive tax cuts, its growth rate would rise. Some of this demographic determinism is only another way for US theoreticians to express one more reason for American superiority.    None the less, we are living longer and having fewer children - but this surely is an unalloyed good thing? Life is all we have, so let's have more of it - and freeing women from thraldom to large families can only be welcome. If there are big challenges to the way we organise pensions, working life and our attitude to youth and age, then let's rise to them - with a smile rather than beset by gloom.