China, you know before you arrive, is gigantic and in the middle of the world's greatest economic experiment. But nothing can prepare you for the reality. From my window the skyscrapers of Shanghai stretch to the horizon in a view rivalled only by Manhattan or Tokyo. Each building is different, a celebration of the modern, outdoing its neighbour for extravagance of style and ambition.Shanghai may be China's showcase, but the capital, Beijing, is not to be outdone. Now constructing its sixth motorway ring, the city is cross-cut by multi-lane motorways so it feels like a Chinese Los Angeles. Hotels and office blocks on an American scale abound. I asked Communist Party intellectuals how all this could be squared with Marxism. We were meeting in a new hotel with enormous columns modelled on the most extravagant Ming tomb and exquisite paintings of Chinese traditional life stretching in a vast panel to the gilded ceiling. 'With difficulty,' came the wry reply.  But then it was Deng Xiaoping who famously declared that it was glorious to be rich - and that is what the Communist leadership has set out to do. Some   150 million fewer people now live on subsistence wages in an economy that has trebled in size in 20 years, courtesy of an embrace of market economics that would have Marx and Mao turning in their graves. The landlords, entrepreneurs, and small businessmen who were once damned as class enemies are today celebrated as the vanguards of wealth creation; the top rate of income tax is set at 45 per cent, not to deter their energies.  The Communist Party has moved from grudging acceptance to enthusiastic embrace of private enterprise; without it, there is no prospect of the economy generating the 10 million jobs a year needed to soak up migration from the desperately poor countryside to the cities - the minimum to head off social unrest.  The Central Committee is terrified of a repeat of the 1989 Tiananmen riots; the military parades held symbolically in front of the entrance gate to Beijing's Forbidden City have dried up - the committee fears that one of its members could be the victim of a sniper's bullet. The scars of oppression and continued human-rights violations run deep.  Prosperity is thus a political necessity. State enterprises have to be subjected to market disciplines, private property rights partially recognised and business in all forms welcomed in order to win the jobs to offer the regime a minimum degree of legitimacy. The strategy has worked spectacularly; retreat is inconceivable. China is to become a capitalist economy with a difference; it is to be governed by the Communist Party, a prospect that baffles as much as it bewilders.   Yet, after a week's lectures and meetings organised by the Foreign Office's 'Think UK Programme', in which Professor John Kay, author of the  Truth About Markets, and I have delivered a double act talking about 'Making Good Money' to a wide variety of Chinese business audiences, I ponder if the experiment, despite its obvious problems, might yet succeed.  The new 'market socialist' ideology is being constructed under the rubric of 'The Three Represents' (the Chinese love of talking in riddles makes hiding the retreat from Marxism rather easier). In essence, communism is stone-dead. Instead, the party will aim to represent first, advanced economic forces (the new business elite); second, the national culture (embracing Confucian commitment to social harmony and, amazingly, even democracy and basic human rights, I was told); and, third, all the emerging new social constituencies. In short, the party is to transmute itself into a national party that embraces all the elements of China's national discourse.  The model is Japan's LDP, where China's Communists have noted that, notwithstanding a formal apparatus of democracy, in effect, one party rules. With the rate of reform accelerated by the self-defeating secrecy over Sars, the party already has various factions - the Shanghai faction, for example, is one of the more aggressive in arguing for private enterprise and private property rights. But the   prospect is to allow the factions to go public with their differences; faction leaders may eventually even canvass for votes from individual Communist Party members.The party will slowly democratise itself - 'feeling the stones as it crosses the river', in Deng's words - even as it tries to open itself up to every element in Chinese society. It may not be Western-style democracy, but the party believes it may be the only way of keeping 1.3 billion enormously disparate people together in political unity while permitting some genuine political pluralism.  But if political change is glacial, economic change is so fast it is hard to keep pace. China now has an emerging body of company law that requires annual shareholder meetings complete with votes, German-style supervisory boards that are to set long-term corporate goals and American-style levels of financial disclosure with independent audits. So far, only a few companies with overseas share quotations and some of the more visible state-owned enterprises comply with the law; the rest is a morass of dodgy accounts, cronyism, sweetheart deals, share-price rigging and bribery, but the desired direction is clear.  The faster growing companies, like the Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation, which aims to build a million cars in 2006, want to be above reproach and meet international standards from the environment to corporate governance. Moreover,   China's tough regulators of the financial markets and environment alike intend to make sure everybody ultimately behaves, even if at the moment you can smell both the corruption and pollution.  Economic growth is almost inevitable; the country has an infinite supply of cheap labour which, combined with Western production techniques, must raise living standards. If so, the Communist Party will transform itself into a Chinese version of other 'democratic' one-party states like Japan and South Africa. And, if Chinese capitalism, modelled on the best of Japan, the US and Germany, keeps up its momentum, it will be like nothing we have seen before - the dynamism of Hong Kong applied to a whole continent.  If, on top, there is a genuine political opening and an end to human-rights abuses, the results will be as awe-inspiring as Shanghai's Pudong skyline. The concerns are obvious - censorship remains pervasive and imprisonment for intellectuals who dare to write too freely is certain - but the party has embarked on a course whose trajectory must be to offer more liberty, even while it tries to sustain all that is left of communism.  Nobody knows whether the experiment will succeed, although the self-confidence and integrity of ordinary Chinese can only make you optimistic. It could not be more fascinating, or more important.