Americans may have been equally divided on their presidential choice, but on one proposition they were united. The Great American Economic Success Story must continue. But this is precisely what may be impossible to deliver. Indeed the story of the next four years is much more likely to be one of failure, even of calamity.  The US economic success has feet of clay. There may have been five years of 4 per cent growth, a pick-up in productivity, record lows in unemployment and above all the impact of the new economy. But this has much less to do with native entrepreneurial zeal, go-getting capitalism, hire-and-fire labour markets and the wonders of technology than the propaganda from US cheerleaders and British eurosceptics would have us believe.  This is tribute to a consumer boom built on record credit, creating a monumental trade deficit that cannot be financed for ever. The projections that the government will generate a cumulative trillion dollar surplus over the next 10 years assume this impossible economic conjunction will last, so allowing George W. Bush to finance his proposed tax cuts. In effect the Republicans plan to give away an illusory surplus, adding another twist to the coming debacle.   The impact of IT and the new economy is still likely to be immense. The high priests of IT - Bill Gates, Steve Jobs and others - have made fortunes the scale of which has not been seen since the beginning of the past century and which, like the railway and banking fortunes of the Rockefellers and Morgans, are a sign of their economic importance. The IT sector has been a hot spot of growth and productivity.  But the expectations riding on its impact may be a cause of the future economic turbulence. The level of share prices could be justified only if America grows like an Asian tiger for more than a decade, a prospect difficult to achieve. When the bubble in hi-tech shares collapses to more normal levels, that alone could be a source of recession, because so much of the prosperity of the IT sector depends on high prices for hi-tech shares. Because it is a bubble spun from a wider economic bubble, the implosion could spell worse, with not even the skills of Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan able to stop the process.   The riddle of the US economy is less its success than why it has wound up in such a precarious position. This is a continental economy that allows its producers enormous economies of scale. Its workforce belongs to an individualistic culture in which the overwhelming majority recognise the importance of flexibility and mobility. Moreover, there is a ready supply of cheap immigrant labour to keep wage levels down.   Capitalism in the US is raw. Companies are ruthless in their quest for profitability. Wall Street and company boards have made common cause, with directors being given options to buy their own shares cheaply to benefit directly from a higher share price. The value of share options is now close to a trillion dollars, up more than fifteenfold in a decade - one of the greatest wealth transfers in world history. Small wonder corporate giving to the Republicans and Democrats alike has reached such astronomic levels: nothing must rock this gravy train.  Yet the inequality this system has generated is increasingly dysfunctional, and also one proximate cause of its weakness. It has, as Professor Robert Frank details in his subtle and important book, Luxury Fever, been an important driver of almost baroque levels of personal spending that have taken the economy to the limits.  The first-round effect of this concentration of spending power at the top - the US now has more than three million millionaires - is that the rich spend increasingly on luxury items, splurging on everything from their ever-larger houses to their oversized, overpowered cars. These become the benchmark for the middle class; for example, the average new American house now occupies 2,200 square feet compared with 1,500 square feet in 1970 as the middle class trades up to meet the new standards of opulence.  But, because hawkish companies are constraining wage growth, the scale of the spending can be financed only by debt. The stock of household debt now equals household income; the net annual flow of credit to consumers is a trillion dollars a year. In the first three months of this year, US consumers not only did not save, they spent 7 per cent more than they earned by using their credit cards and borrowing capacity to the limit.  The balance sheets of average middle-class Americans don't look too bad because the value of their investments in Wall Street has exploded, not to mention the rise in house prices, making them confident enough to sustain their borrowing.  Americans used to hold about a quarter of their savings in Wall Street; now it has risen to nearly three-quarters. As long as share and house prices keep on rising, the edifice works - but if there were a setback, consumers would be exposed. As they retrench their spending to try to reduce their debt, the consumption that has supported the economy would stop.  As consumers spend, so the US has sucked in imports on an epic scale. This year the US trade deficit will top $400 billion; next year, if the oil price stays around $30 a barrel, it could top $500bn. Americans can square the financial circle without the dollar collapsing only because foreigners are prepared to invest in the US on an equally epic scale, spending more than $100bn a year buying US companies and more than $150bn a year buying US shares and bonds.   But that inflow is no less dependent on the expectation that the good times will continue to roll, and in any case is about to be dwarfed by the size of the deficit. If foreigners fear share prices might fall, the dollar will fall sharply.   At a get-together of central bankers in Jackson Hole this year the consensus was that a 30 per cent drop would be needed substantially to correct the trade deficit. As markets always overshoot, expect the dollar to fall further. US interest rates will have to rise, but that will prick the stock market boom, with disastrous consequences.   Michael Mantel, the economics editor of Business Week who predicted the buoyant impact the new economy would have on stock prices, has just released his new book, The Coming Internet Depression. He argues that just as the internet boom has rested on $100bn a year of venture capital finance launching start-ups because the companies could be floated on the crazy hopes of the stock market, now the process is set to go into reverse.  The New York Times reports 44 out of 274 newly floated dotcoms have gone bust this year; that would be a flood if Wall Street fell back. But the new economy feeds on itself, with dotcoms being a crucial market for each other, so each bust dotcom makes trading more difficult for those that are left. New start-ups will cease; investment will fall back and the surge in productivity be arrested.   The correct response is to cut interest rates to support the markets - but that is impossible given the size of the trade deficit and the impending collapse of the dollar. If the Republicans insist on tax cuts, built on assumptions of economic buoyancy that the markets will recognise are illusory, the loss of confidence will be complete.   As Americans watch prosperity slip away, the cry to protect America from imports will become almost unstoppable. America and the world needed a clear-sighted President who could tell it as it is and ride the political consequences without ill-judged interventions or giving in to America's worst instincts. That is precisely what we lack. It is a dangerous moment - perhaps more dangerous than we know.