Mark Barton was mad; a creature that might have defied even Hitchcock's imagination. But the mad can sometimes see and feel more clearly than the sane; it is part of their complex. There will be plenty of Americans horrified to find themselves empathising with Barton's last note. 'I wake up at night so afraid, so terrified that I couldn't be that afraid while awake. It has taken its toll. I have come to hate this life and system of things. I have come to have no hope.'One in 50 million will react like Barton to their feelings of hopelessness, purposelessness and fear by opening fire on strangers, guilty only of working in the same alienating and high stress offices, and gruesomely murder their wives and children. But in the US it is particularly easy. There are 192 million guns in the country for one thing; and for another this has become an especially rootless and disoriented society. There is a new loneliness abroad in the US along with a growth in kooky new anti-social beliefs, in stark contrast to the paradigm of economic success which the US allegedly represents. Barton, for all his manic disorders, was a product of a very particular civilisation. Barton's callous killings follow the dreadful murders in the Denver high school and the blowing up of federal offices in Oklahoma. It is not too much, as US sociologist Richard Sennett comments, to view this as a civilisation matching late Rome in the state of its decay. Its economic vitality and riches are mirrored by a near complete sense of futility among ordinary Americans. This hitherto remarkably religious society is becoming secularised; it has lost its anchors, and the storm warnings are becoming more obvious. Other countries have sick individuals and horrifying incidents, but none can match the systematic regularity of their occurrence in the US. It has become popular in Europe, especially in Britain, to want to copy the US economic and social model; we should be more wary. There is an underlying rage in the US that belies its apparent economic health.Barton made an irregular income from riding the boom in Wall Street - 'day-trading' - while going through the rituals of American life in a typically anonymous apartment block in a typically anonymous suburb: coaching his children at football and baseball, and even turning up on Sundays for the high-octane, saccharine frenzy that passes itself off as organised religion. Atlanta, like most American cities, is a mindless sprawl of shopping malls, interminable suburbs, parking lots, discount stores and motels, whose recent boom means it sprawls more mindlessly than most. Its denizens live outwardly ordered lives, but what goes on in their heads is increasingly extraordinary. There has always been a tension in American life between rootlessness and order, violence and neighbourliness, massive inequality and generous charity - but the safeguards are being continually eroded.Barton could keep the demons at bay no longer. Day-trading cannot have helped, an occupation that could exist nowhere else but the contemporary US. Here he attempted to pit his wits and $50,000 stake money in a battle to ride the switchback of hourly movements in share prices, spotting a trend and riding it upward or downward. It is lonely and obsessive, and ultimately dependent on little more than luck and a rising market. It was bound to end in tears, losses and depression.In this respect he was in part a casualty of America's stock market boom and the new internet technology that allows anybody access to the market, booming for the last decade. Wall Street has climbed to levels never before seen in US history. US corporations have exploited their growing capacity to use any low-cost production site worldwide in an era of unthreatened globalisation to increase their profits; this together with low oil prices and low US interest rates has created a profits boom which in turn lies behind the unprecedented growth in share prices. If they were high in relation to underlying profits in 1929, they are substantially higher now.In other countries this might seem the concern only of the rich; but in the US share ownership is much more democratised, and men and women with average savings see no reason why they too should not share in the boom, nor play the stock market as if they were Wall Street traders too. Hence day-trading and thus a day in Barton's life: feverishly watching a TV screen alone in a room of shifting strangers while betting your life savings on the movements of a monstrous and disembodied market. Emile Durkheim thought that modern industrialisation created conditions in which individuals could be severed from society's collective consciousness, which he described as anomie; Marx wrote about capitalism creating structural alienation. Neither had encountered day-trading while living in an apartment block in the middle of massive suburban sprawl; both would have immediately recognised how it could lead to the demons inside Barton's head.People like Barton are not confined to the US; Dostoyevskey imagined an 'Underground Man', a kind of shadow or ghost individual living in a Russian city in the nineteenth century who asserts himself through acts of aggression. He is a prototype not just of Barton but probably, if we but knew, of the murderer of Jill Dando. The point about the US is that its economic and social organisation throws up more underground men, that it increasingly lacks the social and psychological constraints to contain them, and that there is a wider culture of violence and access to guns making their consequent acts so extraordinarily dangerous.Carrying fire-arms is a constitutional entitlement embedded in the same constitution that enthrones an individual's right to happiness; Americans are incapable of disentangling one from another. Clinton's effort to lift the legal age for gun ownership to 21 after the Denver massacre, a modest enough initiative, got nowhere; in the 1980s it took seven years to make the minimal progress even of requiring gun purchasers to be registered, a requirement now easily evaded.There is, as Daniel Jeffreys argues in America's Back Porch, a growing undercurrent of rage in Middle America. It manifests itself in the mushrooming of white supremacist militia groups dedicated to war against the federal government; the sinister explosive growth of hiring hitmen to settle disputes over business and love affairs; the common practice of bounties being offered to killers of burglars and muggers. Ordinary citizens feel cut-off. Sennett, in Work: the Corrosion of Character, describes how most Americans now feel that work is hazardous and episodic; continuity of employment is impossible as executives hand down ever more demanding requirements for higher financial returns that can only be met by continual down-sizing. But the consequences are not shared by the faceless bosses who give the orders by e-mail and telephone; they are not in the offices and factories to share the consequences.The feeling of purposeless is exaggerated by television's celebration of celebrity; Americans are on terms of electronic intimacy with the rich and famous even while the real distance between them has never been greater. The figures back up the impression; income and wealth inequality is stunning. Membership of a golf club routinely costs £200,000; the houses of the rich are rebuilt even more lavishly from scratch in an orgy of conspicuous consumption. Never has ordinariness offered so few comforts and compensations, or implied such failure. Americans vent their rage increasingly violently; guns are seen as much a protection as a threat, hence the difficulty of assembling a coalition to control them more tightly.The US will continue, but the contract that has underpinned its famous melting pot is breaking down. When British politicians invoke America's flexible labour markets, cheap discount stores or attitudes to wealth as exemplars for Britain to follow, we should be doubly cautious. Inequality with no limits; television run wholly for profit; income support conditional upon willingness to work and not a citizen's entitlement; the scrapping of planning laws to allow more discount stores; a rootless, unregulated world of work - all may be parts of the American economic success story. But it is also part of a psychosis we don't want to copy .