Superintendent Andy Rhodes, of the Blackpool police, is on his way to Faliraki, there to instruct his Greek counterparts on how to curb the vile behaviour of British tourists. Rhodes can boast a success in his home resort: Blackpool's Merrie England venue is not full of trippers discarding cagoules and cable-knits to flaunt their thermal underwear. Mature holidaymakers who practise portion control (one ampoule of jam per person, please, with a boarding house tea) do not generally run amok on Smirnoff Ice in the town's Jaggy Thistle nightclub. Despite exemplary behaviour by Blackpool's visitors, Tony Blair might wish that Operation Cop Swap was the other way round. Ilias Halyvopoulos, in charge of policing the island of Rhodes, is tough. A young British girl who removed her top in a bar and two mooning boys, all spared jail only in return for large fines, offer evidence of his zero tolerance.  Greek summary justice has not always been popular here. In the case of our plane-spotters and our lorry-drivers, it was considered harsh. But punitive measures chime with the British Government's views on yob culture. The Anti-Social Behaviour Bill, including a £100 spot fine for rowdy conduct and using police power to break up street gangs of youths, is part of a long war. Oiks may still have the upper hand.  From the bars of Rhodes to the terraces of Old Trafford, yob rule is on the rise. Not long ago, the flag of St George and Beckham's girlie hairdos suggested that soccer was becoming a fulcrum for English nationhood. As Mr Blair put it, after the 1996 European Championships: 'Labour's coming home.' Annexing football kudos looks dodgier now, with violence at international and league matches up by 20 per cent last season.  In the media's view, Faliraki makes match-day Sunderland look like Sleepy Hollow. Three young British tourists have died this month; one stabbed, one run over by a dustcart, and one after a series of heart attacks, possibly drug-induced. Those tragedies punctuate a chronicle of disgusting inebriation, oral sex and other beachside practices guaranteed to startle a Blackpool donkey.  What's new? The English yob has been around for ever. Once his, or her, drink of choice was sack rather than Roxxoff, the cocktail supposed to enhance sexual performance, but the effect was similar. In the seventeenth century, Dryden offered this pre-Faliraki cameo. 'Mean time, your filthy foreigner will stare, and utter to himself, Ha! Gens barbare.'  But the Empire could not have been won or Europe tamed without barbarians. Agincourt and Trafalgar might have produced a different scoreline had it not been for the troops described by Wellington as 'the scum of the earth'. Bingeing is classless, too. From Sir Toby Belch, via Euan Blair, to Prince Harry and his polo-trash friends, getting hammered is the province of the affluent.  Loughborough University's unsurprising recent study claiming that moderate lunchtime drinking impairs work and driving was presented, in the leader columns of the Daily Telegraph, almost as a plot to deprive respectable port-quaffers of a human right. British self-delusion about drink stretches from the Athenaeum Club to Rhodes.  Obviously, some young visitors to Faliraki are more interested in Aftershock oblivion than in Graeco-Roman mosaics. Some cannot countenance romance or conversation without the soothing buffer of alcohol. Others just want a fight. But many normal tourists do not recognise their resort in the media's lurid accounts. Nor do visions of affronted Greeks stack up with stories of bar-owners bribing tour reps to bring their charges in and get them drunk. The biggest myth is to paint mass intoxication as an annual binge confined to a certain type of low-life foreign resort.  The inner city where I live is blighted not by burglars, muggers or beggars but by pools of vomit outside the pub at the end of the road. I am rarely frightened on my own behalf but increasingly anxious for teenagers. A knife pulled in a local bar is a commonplace for them. A canister of CS gas let off in a crowded nightclub is not a major event.  All the 19-year olds I know are moderate drinkers and committed late-nighters who got into pubs way before they turned 18. Bar veterans, they are shocked by what they see now. London's West End is, they say, dotted with girls in nice dresses, passed out in shop doorways, or being sick in the gutter. The anecdotal evidence tallies with last week's figures from the Office of National Statistics. Alcohol now causes seven per cent of deaths among men between 15 and 44, and six per cent for women. That rate, tripled over 20 years, makes drink a far more potent killer than drugs.  Though Britons drink the same, per capita, as other Europeans, young people are way ahead of the norm. The average alcohol consumption of children aged 11 to 15 is allegedly 10 units a week, or the equivalent of five pints of beer. Official solutions are incoherent.  Ireland, whose teenagers drink even more than ours, has just announced stringent restrictions on opening time. Scotland has done the opposite, ushering in a regime which, although more liberal, will still be stricter than the open-all-hours policy enshrined in our Licensing Act 2003, due to take effect 18 months from now.  The Government says flexibility will stop a mass exodus of drunks at closing time. It hints that continental timetabling will somehow substitute legless alcopoppers for Jean-Paul Sartre in Les Deux Magots or Italians with a meagre Chianti habit and a grandma in tow. You don't have to be a temperance freak to acknowledge that the real result could be city centres run as alcohol theme parks producing big profits, and the odd dead child.  Liberalisation is an odd tactic for a Government intent on curbing drinking and on the verge, finally, of producing an alcohol strategy. The aim is better health and fewer yobs. But which ones are they talking about? Those branded trouble-makers form three tribes, overlapping but not homogenous. There is the soccer yob, who believes, in the racist heart beating beneath a Union Jack singlet, that the game has gone downhill since Arsene Wenger substituted high-carb diets for pre-match pints. There is the career yob, too busy burgling Cilla Black to be a wider nuisance. And then there are youngsters - more at risk and less of a threat than politicians care to allow. Some are bored, sober and poor. Others, a vulnerable minority, are wealthy enough to drink themselves insensible on cocktails pushed by advertisers as elixirs to turn naive Cinderellas into Friday-night princesses.  Why don't we protect such children from the dangers of adulthood? Partly because we don't see what's happening. This is a prim country, in which the naked rambler, Steve Gough, is now in prison and the new Director of Public Prosecutions is demonised for sending 0.1 grams of cannabis through the post when he was 18. Violence, indignity and miserable sex are, in the British mind, something experienced by other people's children in other people's countries. The reality is far less comforting. From Camden to Blackpool, every Saturday could soon be Faliraki night.