Give or take Mike Tyson, rape usually makes tabloid headlines only when the victim is a man. For preference, he will be famous. The case of Quinten Hann, the Australian snooker star acquitted of raping a student, provoked outrage on his behalf last summer. The reaction to the unsuccessful prosecution of the actor Craig Charles was similarly, and rightly, strident. Such cases are rare. None the less, they propagate the lie that the courts are full of mendacious women and men whose only fault lies somewhere on the narrow spectrum between innocence and misinterpretation. Superficially, the Ulrika Jonsson story has reversed this notion.  For the past week, the media has been investigating Ms Jonsson's charge, made in her autobiography, that she was raped many years ago by an unnamed acquaintance. A gallant tabloid press, abetted by television show hosts, judged it their civic duty to hunt down this man, whom Ms Jonsson still declines to identify.  Having established who he was, newspapers rounded up other women who had suddenly recalled that they found his behaviour worrying. Inevitably, the man's name slipped out 'by mistake' on live TV before appearing on the internet and, finally, in screaming headlines.  His career has been blighted or possibly ruined. He has been punished by media witch-hunters for an alleged rape for which he was neither charged nor tried and which he denies. The fact that the accusation, never reported to police, is unlikely to be tested in court removes any chance to clear his name. And this demolition of a life is, we are asked to believe, doing women a big favour.  Intrusive stories are ubiquitous, but this time some boundary of viciousness has been breached. The appetite for scandal, however tawdry, has increased in line with the growing cult of celebrity, to the point where an Ulrika memoir is greeted as reverently as if Moses has re-emerged with a sequel to the Ten Commandments.  Boy George and Robbie Williams beat Wordsworth and Kipling to the short-list for the television series which will discover the greatest Briton ever. Enemies of cultural relativism are astounded by the philistine nature of a society that prefers S Club 7 to Haydn. They shouldn't be.  Hello! magazine replaced Charles Dickens as the social thesaurus long ago. Jeffrey Archer has supplanted Oscar Wilde. The Osbournes shape the politics of the family. From The Archers to EastEnders, showbusiness informs reality, and practically every aspect of life is filtered through the prism of celebrity. This potency, so the theory goes, produces a pathology of fame in which ordinary men grow sinister or wild with hubris.  The latest Icarus is Angus Deayton, accused by the News of The World of unseemly, and supposedly career-threatening liaisons with unsuitable women. Who cares, apart from his partner? There is no moral issue here, though there may be a practical one. Mr Deayton's line of work, satirising other people's embarrassing foibles, is not necessarily best executed by a presenter alleged to have danced naked while warbling 'Wonderwall' by Oasis.  But this is pretty harmless stuff, and old. The newer celebrity weapons are kiss-and-sell memoirs by women cashing in on male perfidy. Edwina Currie's was the first, followed by Cheryl Barrymore's account of life with Michael, a book so grim and ghastly that any reader reaching the end should turn immediately to Jude the Obscure, or President Prodi's thoughts on the Growth Stability Pact, for some light entertainment.  And then there is Ulrika. No doubt she did not mean inadvertently, and profitably, to shop anyone, but her catalogue of other partners who traduced her proved an ideal launchpad for a mean chronicle of awesome hypocrisy.  'Named,' said page one of the Daily Mirror, complete with a large photograph. How weird that, only last July, a Mirror editorial demanded that men accused of rape should have the same anonymity as their accusers. (Actually, they shouldn't. Anonymity was dropped as unworkable in 1988, partly because the police found it so difficult to gather evidence without prejudicing a trial.)  The Daily Mail's film critic, meanwhile, argued that viewers should be protected from having to witness the rape scene in Irredeemable, no doubt in deference to readers worn out by the paper's five pages detailing the alleged 'worrying appetites' of its latest target.  But it is not only this man who will be affected. Abused women are the real victims of the newest media bloodsport. Only 10 per cent of rapes ever get reported, and 7 per cent of that minority end in a prosecution. A legal fraternity, and a general public, rightly alarmed by the campaign against an unconvicted man, are likely to be more biased against genuine victims, not less.  Overall, this has been a bad week for feminism. The media's subtext to the Jonsson furore is that famous men can treat women as they choose. The venomous genre of get-rich-quick lit is worrying. So is Ulrika's gruesome new reality TV show, in which 15 women move into a Big Brother-style dormitory to fight, tooth and nail, for 'Mr Right', a simpering ex-Army type who used to work for Prince Andrew.  If that scenario does not evoke Simone de Beauvoir, then look at what's happening elsewhere. Estelle Morris, gone in a torrent of woe and inadequacy more befitting the agony column of  Mizz magazine than the Westminster battleground, is being treated as the Ulrika of politics; either a traitor to her gender or a sad victim.  That is nonsense. It is not Ms Morris's fault that the Cabinet reshuffle has produced a line-up so testosteronic as to resemble the Kilmarnock caber-tossing team or that the new party chairman is unlikely to be seen in leopardskin kitten heels.  Ms Morris has looked rather assertive and, anyway, politics for women are better judged on policies than quotas. Down at the macho Home Office, the Government is making up lost ground. Next month's Criminal Justice Bill will address domestic violence for the first time in 25 years. There will be new restraining orders, tougher penalties for those who breach them and, possibly, anonymity for victims, who are assaulted an average of 35 times, often in front of their children, before complaining to the police.  Aside from those measures, driven by Harriet Harman, the Solicitor General, there is other progress. Defendants can no longer cross-examine rape victims in court. Witnesses are better protected. There is at least an acknowledgment that rape is poorly investigated and that victims must be better treated. The review for a forthcoming Sexual Offences Act rightly rejected a lesser charge of date rape.  And still conviction rates remain dire. Hence the move towards allowing judges to direct that past convictions, and even acquittals, of an accused rapist are divulged. That shift, arguably justified by the current crisis, is still a perilous adjustment of defendants' and plaintiffs' rights.  But however the law is finessed, those who suffer sexual violence will not get justice for as long as society treats rape as a lesser crime, in which men are perceived as more vulnerable to injustice than women. The shabby reporting of the Ulrika case, though purporting to reverse that prejudice, has only made things worse.     <B>Mary Riddell live online:</B> Join Mary in our online discussion on child protection this Thursday at 2pm. You can post your questions now online at  
www.observer.co.uk/comment</B>