This Thursday, Mary Bell will ask the High Court to grant her anonymity for life. Powerful sections of the press believe that she should have no such right. So, for a while, did I. Miss Bell, who killed two small boys when she was 11, had immunity from identification only to protect her child, a ward of court. But her daughter turned 18 some months ago and a temporary order to protect them both expires this week. There are good reasons, as well as prurient ones, for knowing who Mary Bell is. Irrevocable gagging orders are, in general, a bad precedent and an assault on press freedom. There is the question of rehabilitating offenders, widely seen as hardly more reliable than converting frogs to princes. How are people to witness the power of redemption if the redeemed are on a one-way ticket to oblivion?  And then there is privacy, enshrined in Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and less desirable than it seems. The line between protection and isolation is narrow, and a complicity of lies and silence cannot be the ideal bond between a mother and child.  Add in the lessons that should have been learned. The outcome of the James Bulger case, in which Robert Thompson and Jon Venables were, uniquely, granted the anonymity now sought by Mary Bell, may have chastened a savage press. Vigilantism might have subsided. Once I believed all of this was true and that Miss Bell did not need a draconian order to live in peace. I don't think that any more.  The mob was out again last week to watch Ian Huntley, the man accused of the Soham murders, brought to court through a hail of eggs, tomatoes and screaming grandmas. One had taken her nine-year-old grandson out of school to watch, on the grounds, extreme even under Struwwelpeter-style deterrence theory favoured by Belloc and Hoffmann, that it was 'an education for him not to go off with strangers'.  Then there are the passive spectators; the busloads of necro-trippers who ate their chips in Soham churchyard and posed for their Kodak moments at the altar and outside the caretaker's house. The cult of the monster is growing and the public does not lack a choice of candidates.  This week, Mary Bell will be in the public eye. Soon after that, according to most newspapers, Myra Hindley will finally be free and, if the  Sun is correct, installed in a convent in the South of England. Whether Miss Hindley gets to play the Ophelia card is far from settled. It is virtually certain that an appeal by the convicted murderer, Anthony Anderson, on 21 October will, rightly, remove the Home Secretary's last powers to set minimum sentences. So Miss Hindley will get her challenge.  The Lord Chief Justice may rule that, after 37 years and a low-risk assessment, her tariff should expire forthwith. Or, as some expert lawyers believe (and Mr Blunkett will profoundly hope), he might decide there are grounds, such as her additional confessions in prison, for keeping her there. The only reliable prediction is that if she is freed she, too, will demand lifelong protection against those baying for her blood.  We are becoming obsessed with creating demons, fake and real. The criminal justice system is    a reliable supplier of hate figures, but so is television. Beyond the mock loathing for Nasty Nick and Jade from Big Brother lies a gallery of terrorist villains, too amorphous or, in the case of Osama bin Laden, too elusive or too dead, to hunt down.  Amid that insecurity, there are the tangible despots. These familiar monsters, from Milosevic to Mugabe, are appalling in their cruelty and still, in some never acknowledged way, a reassurance. The rogue individual, less menacing a spectre than the rotten society, offers proof of our innocence and a licence not to think too carefully.  The debate about what attacking Iraq would mean for its citizens, the region and the world has been short-circuited because its proponents, cleverly, have cut out the extras and focused on Saddam alone. Zap the villain and all, in the PlayStation school of international warfare, will end well.  Martin Amis's tirade against communism in his new book, Koba the Dread, heralded another revival for Hitler and Stalin, the mega-monsters of the last century. Their scorelines of human attrition are being compared again, almost like Manchester United and Arsenal results. Constructing a Premiership of tyranny is, as some commentators have implied, easier on the brain and on the conscience than calculating, say, the deaths resulting from white colonial barbarism in Africa.  The game of virtue and villainy has become too simplified. As Marina Warner pointed out in her 1994 Reith Lectures, the Greek mythic heroes, like Oedipus and Jason, served as tragic warnings. Their stories of matricides, infanticides, self-blindings and suicides made them cautionary figures, not exemplary ones. Or, put another way, no one is ever going to mistake Orestes for Matt Damon.  Similarly, old monsters were not the avatars of undiluted evil now on show everywhere from Tomb Raider to the Hague war crimes tribunal. Frankenstein's creation could have been different, given some kindness. Good and evil, in Mary Shelley's story, are interchangeable.  Yet somehow this obvious truth has disappeared. In a modern mythology dealing only in absolutes, Myra Hindley, a monster pitched somewhere between Medusa and Medea, is irredeemable while all who mourn the dead schoolgirls, Holly and Jessica, are sanctified.  Segregating heroes and villains is designed to hide the truth of monsters. People need them to affirm how different they are. They loathe them because they are, in some cases, too similar for comfort. Look at the Peterborough court scenes and the faces frozen in mid-scream. Read the placards. 'Capitol [sic] punishment. Why should the rest of society pay to keep these sickos in comfort? Hang them.' The virtuous accolade of not having been accused of murdering anyone does not mask the identity of the lynch mob. This is our home-grown monster.  When I last wrote about mob culture, a very few readers wrote to commend its proponents as the authentic voice of public opinion. Dozens more, including a man whose young daughter had been raped and murdered, said how repugnant they found the new mood of vigilantism.  It is also frightening. Human rights offer better justice and more freedom, but a vicious minority, cheered on by some newspapers, is trampling on both. If Mary Bell is ever identified, will they leave her in peace? Or will they be off to harass, threaten or gawp?  When Dame Elizabeth Butler Sloss granted Miss Bell a temporary injunction in April, she described her case as 'very difficult' and 'not obvious'. Six months down the line, the mob has been practising. In an age of monsters, Dame Elizabeth may find her judgment less difficult and more obvious than she had first supposed.