Meeting royalty has a Godot factor. At any event attended by a member of the royal family, the invitees must be in place long before the honoured guest arrives. Security is an issue, naturally. Prince Charles has been approached by an eccentric with a fake weapon, and the late Queen Mother once smashed her lace-trimmed parasol over the head of a man following her carriage, unaware that he wanted to give her daughter a ten-shilling note. But excessive waiting also has a deeper purpose. When eventually the royal visitor enters, the squashed hordes will be hotter and humbler; constrained by new clothes, tight shoes and an unexpected awe of a representative of a family that knows how to command a deference out of kilter with its popularity. A third of the population wants a republic, a third couldn't care what befalls the monarchy, but damp-palmed curtseyers abound. While this reverence may be bogus and temporary, it still offers evidence that the House of Windsor can deploy the mystique Walter Bagehot isolated as the one essential ingredient of survival. Arguably, the reservoir of fake fealty has deepened, rather than diminished, as the Windsors' popularity has slumped. The idle aristocracy that used to offer camaraderie rather than deference is busy selling stately home marmalade to stave off death duties and dry rot. The working classes of the East End, dismissed by Victoria's attendant as 'socialists and the worst Irish' when they booed the Queen, are less feral. The British class structure, so compartmentalised in 1950 that 95 per cent of the population knew which socio-economic box they ticked, is amorphous now. <B>Between deference and derision</B>Sycophants and hecklers have lost some of their sway, leaving an extended middle class to work out its conflicting response to modern royalty. Difficult divorces, toe-kissing financial advisers, tea parties with fake sheikhs, cannabis scandals, under-age drinking binges and Weight Watchers endorsements have made the Windsors, with some exceptions, objects of derision. So why, in an egalitarian and critical age, should they also still command obeisance? Partly because the flipside of scorn is pity. Only the harshest would not feel sorrow for a Queen whose sister and mother died within seven weeks of one another. But people feel sorry even for those royals least able to command respect. The Earl and Countess of Wessex are deemed too risible for serious criticism, while those who earn a 'most-loved' citation get placed almost beyond reproach. Before and after her death, the Queen Mother was regarded, by the edict of traditionalists, as a sweet and self-sacrificing martyr to duty. She was also an indulged autocrat with a Rabelaisian appetite for luxury, a multimillion overdraft and high-Tory sympathies. Widowed young, she was at first mortified at having to relinquish power to her daughter. The £643,000 a year supplied by the taxpayer was her lifelong state compensation. Icon or cling-on? Such debate became almost treasonable in the days after her death. Nor was there much to learn from the battle between those in the right-wing press who vilified a supposedly Jacobin BBC and those who detected, in a few frustrated Casualty watchers demanding less Royal coverage, the chrysalis of a republic. But neither did the many thousands who trooped past Her Majesty's coffin vindicate the loyalists' claim that reverence for old-style royalty is as fierce as ever. Citizens who queued for 14 hours to see the catafalque - and the half a million who came to Westminster to watch the funeral - were engaged in something more complex than a simple act of allegiance to a beloved Queen Empress. They wanted to be participators in the news, rather than mere observers. They were keen to find, in a friendly crowd sharing tea and sandwiches, a communitarian spirit that politicians laud but cannot instil. They were also, inadvertently, underlining the fact that heritage worship is practised not by those societies most certain about who they are but by those least sure of their national identity. Among the vast majority of people who stayed away, many also watched the televised funeral with awe. For some, it may have been a moving experience. For others, it will have offered a spectacle as gripping but emotionless as the Chinese State Circus. Both reactions are consistent with puzzlement, or anger, over a country better at window-dressing than content. When trains don't run on time, when motorways are clogged, when tradition decrees that we're scared to join the euro but we dare attack Iraq, when there is a famine of teachers, then Britain's status as the world's most lavish undertaker looks hollow. But the best case for a reformed monarchy was made, ironically, not by the cynical but by loyal mourners. Some who queued through a cold night for a glimpse of the royal coffin were told just after dawn that Black Rod had closed Westminster Hall for two hours without explanation or notice. Throughout, ordinary people were allotted a walk-on role in a story redolent of old class values and featuring gracious royalty and loyal retainers, epitomised by 'Backstairs Billy', the Queen Mother's manservant. Although younger members of the royal family played the populist card (The Queen Mum was an Ali G fan. Respec!), something had altered. For the first time pageantry was questioned by those who detected, beyond vibrant heritage, a playschool country defined by its dressing-up box. <B>The limits of republicanism</B><BR><BR>So what now? When faith in God wears thin and trust in politicians sinks lower, the monarchy can at least market itself as a model of stolid continuum. Republicanism has thrown up few more enticing avatars than Cromwell and President Hattersley. Despite flutters of public enthusiasm, nothing much has changed since the years before Queen Victoria's birth. When all of George III's 56 other grandchildren were illegitimate and the Hanoverian line looked doomed, there were strong hopes among liberal progressives that the hereditary monarchy was over and that Britain would follow the example of the United States. Today, President Bush's America, complete with Enron, the death penalty and hawkish foreign policy, looks rather less like the paradigm of fairness and entitlement that the architects of the constitution envisaged. Besides, the most powerful supporter of the British status quo is America, whose tourists marvel at the ceremonial palaces that serve a family costing more than all the other royal houses of Europe put together. So long as Britons believe that national identity and economic buoyancy are enmeshed with the survival of an overblown House of Windsor, Her Majesty's subjects collude in promoting the monarchy's folklore as their own. One myth that the royal family has successfully peddled, with the help of Tony Blair, is that the Windsors are late converts to populism. The notion of Diana as a 'people's princess' ignored the fact that the 'common touch' is chiefly practised by those royals who are most adept at creating the illusion that monarchy exists for the benefit of ordinary folk. There is, as yet, almost no evidence that the royal family (while possibly willing to jettison some of its minor players) has any urge to amend its own lifestyle. The signs are, conversely, that the Queen and Prince Charles would be much more pragmatic about shedding the unwarranted political power wielded by a constitutional monarch. If there is enough demand, the Queen may amend the Act of Settlement, which forbids a Catholic from taking the throne. Male primogeniture is unlikely to be insisted on for much longer. Disestablishment of the Church of England, endorsed by some bishops, may suit a future king who sees himself as a 'defender of faith' and who wants to marry his mistress.The truly sacrosanct areas, for an apolitical Queen and her highly political heir alike, are wealth and status. Minor gestures apart, both are non-negotiable. Blue-blooded courtiers may get replaced by a secondee from British Airways or a tradesman's son. The Queen might visit McDonald's, sign a football, dispense with the Royal Yacht, and pay (in contravention of her late mother's wishes) a nominal amount in tax. She might iron old Christmas wrapping paper, save bits of string and stick to one bar on the electric fire. Such frugalities, reminiscent of her mother's habit of having Highland Spring bottles filled with tap water, signal only an intention to cling on to all assets, small or great.   <B>Charles III: the people's king?</B><BR><BR>Prince Charles, similarly, has some ascetic tastes. His Prince's Trust demonstrates a constructive approach to poverty and deprivation that Diana, despite her crowd-pleasing charity work, never came close to emulating. Whether devising kitsch townships or producing not-for-profit shortbread biscuits, Charles can demonstrate a more or less sure social conscience. The state of the nation - its poverty, its prisons, its Wimpey architecture and its frail ecostructure - preys on him. And yet it seems far from certain that the Prince, while happy to axe some fringe royals, would use his accession to concede a single palace or privilege. In his view, the British public yearns for continuity and tradition; something, as he once put it to me, that 'isn't frenetically fashionable but is just there'. Any reduction in lackeys or ceremonial would, under that argument, chip away at the nation's lust for cosy certainties. The Prince of Wales is not a greedy man; simply an aspiring monarch for whom personal wealth and status correlate conveniently with the public good. In a democratic society, does this dubious assumption matter? For two reasons, it does. The first is that an obsession with tradition and the plastic Beefeater branch of history is a brake on Britain as a modern nation. We risk becoming the dowager of Europe, peering at the progress of others through a lorgnette of nostalgia and heritage. Behind the Chancellor's five economic tests for joining the euro lies the insularity of a country schooled by its traditions of monarchy always to look back and never forward. The broader problem of a royal family at the apex of an anachronistic class structure is that such status is not simply symbolic. It reinforces the unfairness of a society that thinks itself more equal than it is. The glacial one-upmanship of Evelyn Waugh and Anthony Powell may be vanished or muted, but Oxbridge places still go to the wealthiest few, and social mobility is less fluid than the new, catch-all middle class structure suggests. Even the Labour Party hierarchy still favours top drawer contenders, rather than more proletarian candidates. As DJ Taylor pointed out recently in the New Statesman, the party always picks its ideologues and leaders - Attlee, Crosland and now Blair - from the expensively educated bourgeoisie, rather than the working class.   <B>A nation ill at ease with itself</B><BR><BR>The recent attack by Gavyn Davies, the chairman of the BBC, on the corporation's mockers as 'white, middle-aged and middle-class', prompted two reactions. One was a defence of the white middle classes by the white middle classes. The second was a suggestion that Mr Davies, elevated by his wealth to the plutocratic upper stratum that has moved in to fill a Wooster-shaped vacuum, was simply being snobbish. More probably, he was expressing frustration. The BBC, though clever at identifying a young, multiracial, diverse audience living north of Hampstead, cannot work out how to reach or charm it. Old institutions - the monarchy, the church and the public service broadcaster alike - seem powerless to bridge a cultural gulf. Neither the royal creed of noblesse oblige nor New Labour's mantra of meritocracy resonate in a Britain where black, Asian and other British-born minorities are more than 7 per cent of a 57 million population. Yet we are still the subjects of hunting, shooting, fishing monarchs whose own multicultural past, from imperial Russia to Hanover, was long since homogenised into upper-class Britishness. The disjunction between the House of Windsor and the society over which it presides was marked out as insupportable in the days after the Queen Mother died. Despite the crowds and tears, the 'mourn-or-else' clamour of the right wing crystallised unease in the majority population. As the Queen Mother lay in state, they were burying other grandmothers in Bethlehem. MPs called back to Parliament for an emergency session of eulogies were not permitted to discuss the crisis in the Middle East. Perhaps the Queen Mother's funeral was the hour at which the monarchy drew closest to its most loyal subjects. It was also a reminder of the gap between the top and the bottom of society. Crowded prisons, a rise in violent crime, struggling schools, pregnant teenagers and hard-drinking children cannot be branded, like the words 'By Royal Appointment' on a pickle jar, as the especial product of the House of Windsor. In any case, social superiority, pace Prince Harry's exploits, is no insurance against yobbishness. But equally, the hereditary principle is not simply a Jobcentre for kings or queens. Trickle-down privilege means that outcomes for too many citizens are determined by accident of birth.   <B>Class and the hereditary principle</B>In March this year, the Royal Economic Society produced evidence that Britain is becoming a less socially mobile society. Those who are born at the top of the heap are likely to stay there, and vice versa. The wealthiest monopolise the best education and the best-paid jobs, while children from poorer families who grew up in the 1980s found it harder than their equivalents of the two preceding decades to get a better job and a higher salary than their parents. The working class has got smaller as manual jobs declined, but the new recruits to the middle class have not displaced the children of richer parents. The latter, however deficient in intellect or ambition, seem ring-fenced not by nepotism but by the fact that affluence offers automatic insurance against failure. Emphasis on universally high standards at school and an opening up of higher education suggest a new equality and an open-to-all society. Yet the social gap has widened. Thirty-five per cent of graduate farmers and 20 per cent of health professionals are doing the same job as their fathers. Less than 10 per cent of children move from the lowest to the highest social groups. This unequal system, more pronounced than in almost any other developed country, defies both old socialist dreams of equality and New Labour's message that talent is the passport to success. Only the hereditary principle offers a reliable model for the way society works: a top-down structure in which monarchs and road-sweepers can ascribe their destiny to birthright. While it would be absurd to blame the monarchy for all inequalities, it is self-evident that a society that demands excessive veneration and wealth for its top echelon offers a diminishing scale of kudos and bounty to the lesser ranks. The same goes for respect. It is insulting that citizens who can talk to politicians without ceremony must assume a pantomime obeisance in addressing a minor royal. In an informal age, modern Britain, with its creaky ceremonial, its swan-upping, guard-changing and state opening of Parliament, less resembles an evolving nation than a revival of HMS Pinafore.In 1897, the medical statistician Arthur Newsholme recorded an infant mortality rate of 127 babies in every 1,000 live births in Hampstead, rising to 197 in the East End. Amost half of the working class lived in poverty and a 1900 Conference of Ladies on Domestic Hygiene was told of 'case after case of little match box makers working habitually from the time that school closes until 11pm'. Yet when the Queen Mother died, the century through which she had lived was painted almost universally as a balmy, blessed age. And even now, one in four children remains poor. Although society has changed, a Victorian class system has blocked progress and threatens to impede it further. In a post-Imperial age, Britain remains semi-detached from a changing Europe. The House of Lords has altered, the Human Rights Act is in place, but tradition, embodied in an unreformed monarchy, continues to stifle us. Change is long overdue, but the more strident voice belongs to fearful traditionalists. <B>The slow path to modernisation</B>By contrast, the liberal progressive case is tentative. Wishful republicans dream of the revolution but never explain how a tenacious House of Windsor is to be dislodged. Modernisers call for more modest change: a monarchy that lives in the same world as the rest of us, that pays its taxes and relinquishes the royal prerogative. A prime minister and government who find the monarchy a useful and harmless source of executive power are increasingly out of touch with the country's mood. The idea that a lapse from pristine family values has thrown the royal family into disrepute is nonsense. The late Queen Mother's most powerful brothers-in-law comprised an abdicator with a divorced mistress and a drug user of uncertain sexual orientation. The mystique of royalty has been dented not by the knowledge that they are too much like us than by the worry that they are not similar enough. The move towards a slimmed-down monarchy more eager to pay its own way and to live less grandly should begin now. How, when empire has gone, the Commonwealth is in turmoil, and the House of Windsor gives little impression of serving any cause bar its own, does it propose to promote a modern Britain? Supplying the answer will not only involve constitutional pragmatism or crowd-pleasing gestures. It will also mean personal sacrifice. Without that, the monarchy will remain an emblem of the inequality that increasingly corrodes the nation.In Marie Antoinette's France, or the Romanovs' Russia, such divergence proved catastrophic. In middle-class Britain, where even cynics thrill to an invitation from the Master of the Household, no such grim outcomes threaten. None the less, there are few good long-term prospects for a monarchy that exploits its subjects' earnings, patience, credibility and goodwill. The Windsors' reverence for history and tradition makes it both ideally placed to read those warning signs and wholly unable to avert them. That leaves citizens as the driver of a change that now looks inevitable. In the debate after the Queen Mother's death, the result depended not on the agenda of government, media or the royal family itself. Press coverage, coloured with the stridency of panic, proved that the public had moved beyond easy manipulation. Would the mood swing to mourning, indifference or hostility? It hardly mattered which. In a society where equality is illusory, people proved less divided and more powerful than they knew. The consensus of those who decry change in the monarchy and those who demand it was identical. Nothing will be the same again. There has rarely been a clearer mandate for reform. <B>