The Windsors, like the The Simpsons, are here to stay. Rumours that the world's most celebrated dysfunctional families may face their demise have, in both cases, proved premature. Matt Groening pledges that his cartoon series will continue, while, in the West Country, the Queen's travelling roadshow has triumphed over rain, cynicism and her husband's Homeresque comments to blind people about 'eating dogs' for anorexics. On television, the first episode of William Shawcross's genuflection to the royal jubilee attracted 5.5 million viewers, so trouncing not only The Simpsons but also the European Champions League semi-final between Real Madrid and Barcelona. Her Majesty, as she explained last week to her loyal subjects, is going nowhere. Renouncing abdication is not surprising.  At 76, she is still in the junior league of a gerontocracy headed by the Pope and mandated by God. Nor has she ever hinted she might resign, as an elderly Dean of Windsor discovered when he told her that he was stepping down. 'Retiring?' she said, with a derisive snort. 'I can't'.  It is feasible that she will one day hand over to Prince Charles, once he has resolved the Camilla problem and cleared his in-tray. Last week alone, he was railing against 'genetically modified urban planning', calling for initiation ceremonies for adolescents, as pioneered by primitive societies, and launching a range of Duchy of Cornwall organic ice-cream.  How curious that modernisers see the amiable, tortured, conscience-ridden prince as the route ahead. Certainly, he seems hardly less political than Queen Victoria, who sought to block Gladstone's return to power on the grounds that he was 'a most disagreeable person - half-crazy and so excited'. Charles already has a reputation as an interferer in policy areas that interest him, but any elastic take on constitutional proprieties seems less problematic than his rigidity on other subjects.  Although he is a genuine social reformer, his natural conservatism in aesthetic matters makes his mother look like the Sam Taylor-Wood of constitutional change. On architecture, his is a realm of Vanbrugh and Palladio, not of Rogers or Gehry. In Charles's world, Kylie is avant-garde, denim is subversive and Victorian values prevail. In modern Britain, the dislocation between Mill on the Floss standards and those of the Millwall precincts looks increasingly odd.  Football thugs are kicking heads in, swastikas are daubed on a trashed synagogue, three Burnley council seats fall to the BNP and school truants and muggers prowl the streets. But still, the bunting flutters in some bucolic corner of the West Country. Thousands wave their Union Jacks as the Queen inspects locally raised boar and vats of farmhouse cider before accepting the gracious gift of an organic sausage for herself and scrumpy for her husband.  This is how things used to be and may be again, should the nation avail itself of Her Majesty's kind offer. In a time of turmoil, she has stressed the need for balanced institutional change and, effectively, offered herself as its agent. This gesture, delivered in her speech to Parliament, sounds bizarre, but it is no odder than the royal resurrection.  A decade ago, the Windsors began to be perceived as stingy, freeloading, graceless people who got married in Westminster Abbey and divorced on Panorama. In the ghastly carnival following Diana's death, the Queen was saved, in the most nervous moment of her reign, by Mr Blair, who supplied his best advisers.  The tumbrel-stoppers of Millbank performed a miracle. Royalty, which lost half its support over 15 years, is confident again. The public seems pliant and republicanism finds no new icons. If President Branson was never an inspiring avatar, then President le Pen sounds vastly worse. At the same time, an ICM poll suggests that 43 per cent of voters trust Mr Blair less than they did five years ago. From this revolving door of fortunes, the Queen has tripped boldly out as a symbol of reassurance and an architect of change.  Her Majesty may be calling the nation's bluff. On a minor point, her own evolution has not been nearly so hectic as the Shawcross documentaries claim. The hats are less baroque now and the voice has dipped from garrotted ostrich timbre to a more normal pitch. The royal yacht has been replaced with a palace website and a modest tax bill, but her core of wealth, privilege and power remains untouched.  On the substantive issue, the Queen is being crafty. She knows that we dislike change almost as much as she does. Why, but for public inertia, would the monarchy have survived, virtually unchanged, for so long? Neo-Georgian estates, new-look Minis and country pubs are not hallmarks of a naturally progressive nation. They are the stamp of a society in love with its past, uncertain of its identity and prone to allow a fondness for rose-draped cottages to slide into insularity, Euroscepticism and scaremongering over immigration and asylum. Despite devolution and a half-reformed House of Lords, Britain remains instinctively wary of the progress instigated by a prime minister who has also changed along the way.  His epiphany, like the Queen's, was Diana's death. Her Majesty learned her PR lessons and moved forward. Mr Blair, conversely, has never quite recovered from the querulous, febrile   national mood he helped engender. Five years on, high-octane sentiment mutates into borderline panic. It is evident in the Home Secretary's talk of 'swamping' schools with immigrant children and in the anxiety whipped up over violent crime.  It was discernible in the £2 million police operation to crush a tiny amount of May Day violence. Proportionality is easy after the event, but there was scant intelligence to bolster warnings of big trouble. The Metropolitan Police's over-reaction, though understandable in the light of last year's rioting, also bore a whiff of the melodrama that percolates the worst of government wheezes.  The latest kneejerk, in the fine tradition of marching yobs to cashpoints, is attacking truancy by cutting child benefit. Not only are there better government schemes in place to keep children in schools, but the crude use of the welfare system to regulate social behaviour would be unfair, impossible to administer and, as the Wisconsin 'Learnfare' pilot has shown, certain to fail.  But this is Crucible country. A witchhunt rooted in the Damilola Taylor murder trial is fed by the erroneous belief that crime is out of control. The current buzzword is 'trust', but the problem, for politicians and institutions, is less a dearth of faith than an overload of panic. The result is evolutionary malfunction and a society poised between stasis and a ghost-train rattle into chaos.  Enter Her Majesty, an artful pragmatist offering continuity and suggesting measured change in national institutions. Let's take her at her word. In her department, the minimum shopping-list should be a leaner, humbler royal family that gives up the Crown prerogative bestowing unreasonable power on a Prime Minister and an executive.  After that, it is over to Mr Blair, who, it is widely argued, is a presidentially minded leader longing to usurp the Queen's function. Something much more strange is happening now. Our newly progressive monarch has pinched his role instead.