Two years before the end of the last century, the Queen was accosted by a friend alarmed by the (sclerotic) pace of change affecting the royal family. 'Will anything be the same come the millennium?' the friend asked. 'Humph,' Her Majesty replied. 'Mummy will still be around.' The former Dean of Windsor who told me this anecdote seemed not quite to know what to make of it. The 'humph' appeared to signify jokey brusqueness. The allusion to 'Mummy' and the notion of a mother as the last bulwark against the unknown offered the contrasting picture of an elderly monarch rendered almost childlike by a parent's influence. That is how it was. The death of the Queen Mother will be met by tear-stained obsequies and by reminders of her lack of liberal credentials. She will go to her grave imbued with all the mystery of a woman who favoured muteness in an age when others of her clan discovered Jerry Springer-style disclosure. Who was she? A Queen Empress with a whiff of pearly queen and Hackney Empire. A martinet who lived for duty but contrived also to lace her days with horse-racing and gin. She was, as one courtier said: 'An upmarket Alf Garnett.'  She was also the great illusionist, able, against all logic and evidence, to sustain the notion that royalty existed for the benefit of common folk. All that signifies not much, beyond the chameleon quality bestowed by money, canniness and and extreme old age.  Her real function was that of a matriarch running the most patriarchal family in the world. She was its glue and, to a degree, its fragmenter. The Windsors, under her leadership, were less an extended family than an extruded one. Through divorce, rivalry and death, the Queen Mother and her two daughters played out, over three-quarters of a century, a frozen tableau of the perfect family unit, distanced from, and sometimes almost oblivious to, the warring fringes. Her husband, frail, shy and a man who never thought to be king, had referred to his family, protectively, as 'us four'.  And then there were three: Elizabeth, who would not contemplate the introduction of a less formal Court Circular, let alone pay income tax, without first 'selling' such plans to her disapproving mother. Margaret, ill, confined to a wheelchair and destined to die a few weeks before a mother who, though sick and frail, used almost the last residues of strength, attending her younger child's burial. Perhaps there seemed little point in living when so many memories were consigned to the grave.  Years had passed since 'us three' became the nexus of a clan riven by unhappiness. It was hardly the fault of Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon that the royal family, over the course of her lifetime, should become a case study for marital breakdown. Her ambitions were never known, but it seems certain that high among them would have been the desire to present to the nation a shining lesson in family life. If she ever despaired of her failure, she should have been less harsh on herself; she succeeded beyond dreams.  Her lesson, inadvertent but no less valuable for that, is that relationships do not follow the assembly rules of an Ikea sideboard. If the Queen Mother's wish-list had applied, the marriage of Charles and Diana, arranged with her blessing and assistance, would never have foundered: Charles, her favourite grandson, would not have resumed his relationship with Camilla Parker Bowles; Margaret, actively discouraged by her mother from her unsuitable affair with Peter Townsend, might have abjured damaging regret; Fergie might have cut out WeightWatchers' promotions; Sophie Rhys-Jones might have forsworn champagne with fake sheikhs; Andrew might have avoided topless shipmates; Anne might have learned to distinguish between deferential old ladies and professional stalkers.  How much such aberrations bothered the Queen Mother is unclear. The probability is that her serenity, unfaked, was a product of a rigid moral code that insulates against all hurt. Her method, to disapprove of imperfections rather than to grieve for them, was bolstered by public graciousness. She had dignity, which is more than you can say for the rest of us.  To look back now at television replays of the marriage of Charles and Diana is to shudder at how absurd and gullible we were. All those who danced in the Mall or sipped Lambrusco at street parties can shudder now. We know more than we did, but we should have known enough, even then, to be embarrassed by the outpourings of schmaltz and reverent nationalism over a posh girl in a bad dress and an indifferent prince who, when asked if he was in love, replied: 'Whatever that means.' And now we are frozen by cynicism, bored by the routines of royalty and sated on its venality.  In an age where the family is in flux, a chaotic royal model is a more hopeful example than stage-managed perfection. In choosing regally to distance herself, the Queen Mother supplied a tactic that a government in love with family consultation documents, baby-naming ceremonies, empty homilies and child-curfew plans would have done well to follow. Families, royal or otherwise, are no longer malleable. How much that affected her may never be known. All that she could do was to offer herself as a symbol of immutability. As the royal family crumbled, the notion grew that the Queen Mother, a beacon in a slew of dysfunction, was its last great emblem of perfection. As she was possibly wise enough to know, she was nothing of the kind.  Two dutiful daughters, possessed of a gymslip obeisance, do not constitute success. The Queen Mother, for all her autocracy and devotion to duty, was ultimately powerless to impose a cherished but anachronistic rulebook. In her lifetime, the royal family has changed from pompous exemplar of family values to a soup of haphazard relationships. Slowly, we have moved from being a nation crazed by the romance of an ill-starred royal wedding to a more tolerant and kinder society that would be happy for the Prince of Wales to marry the mistress he loved all along. As the Blair government struggles to come up with formulae for how we should live now, royalty, by a supreme irony, has become a brand leader in offering models for a new century.  Although such an outcome may have been the Queen Mother's nightmare, the crumbling of old bonds and certainties happened, in part through her intervention and on her long watch. Much as she might have wished it otherwise, the demolition of the myth of the perfect family is perhaps her most valuable legacy.