The budget for the film of Bloody Sunday, on television on 27 January and in cinemas from February, was £3 million. The bill for Lord Saville's public inquiry, on which the credits may roll in 2004, will be at least £100m and perhaps much more. The film demolishes any residual shred of confidence in Lord Widgery's wrongful judgment that British soldiers were justified in killing 13 unarmed civilians on the streets of Derry. The inquiry is likely to reach the same conclusion. When Bloody Sunday is Saville on the cheap, it is tempting to think the inquiry redundant. Why bother with a fractious trawl through the cold, contested evidence of three decades ago, when they do it so much better in the movies? Oh no, they don't, say critics. The film is 'viciously anti-British', according to Ruth Dudley Edwards. Gerald Howarth MP, equally splenetic, urges its producers respectfully to ponder 'the Parachute Regiment's recent role, laying their lives on the line'.  The hint that soldiers who killed children should be granted immunity from scrutiny because fighters wearing similar berets behaved well in Kosovo illustrates why the wounds of 1972 have never healed. It seems fitting that the endgame now should be played out in Paul Greengrass's film and in Jimmy McGovern's forthcoming version for Channel 4. In Ireland, truth and reconciliation are often served with popcorn.  Northern Ireland is a hatchery for Hollywood. James Nesbitt, the star of  Bloody Sunday , is from Ulster Protestant stock. Liam Neeson, Michael Collins in the biopic, is from Ballymena. Greer Garson came from County Down, and James Mason put Belfast bars on the US check-trousered tourist circuit in Odd Man Out. But the Troubles have offered the most consistent supply of films blending romance and brutality into a more or less curdled version of the truth.  Bloody Sunday may be a nail bomb or two short of reality, but it doesn't romanticise the IRA or vary a verity that is, anyway, tamper-proof. We know that unarmed teenage boys were slaughtered by enforcers of British law and order. If a rough-cut of history can console the grieving and shock the unaware, that is good enough. The unexpected thing about the film is how modern it looks.  Flip to fast forward and the burnt-out cars, the mobs and missiles become last week's television news. An argument between two women outside Holy Cross School in North Belfast reignited the battle that left Catholic pupils dulled by anti-depressants and bad dreams. Although the Protestant residents have been devious and vicious, nationalists are not blameless in part two of a new made-for-television drama.  In an unchanged cast-list, Father Aidan Troy, parish priest and governor, takes the Pied Piper role. Behind him is a string of little girls, groomed for the cameras tracking them to school. There are other, safer routes, but most parents favour the gauntlet of sectarian thuggery and the evening news. The children's hair ornaments, fat as water lilies, seem to have grown in proportion to the violence. After school, the bigger boys came out for nights of what the First Minister, David Trimble, calls 'recreational rioting'. Some hatred has not mutated in 30 years, to the 'despair' of the man who watched its incubation.  Martin McGuinness was the IRA's second-in-command in Derry on the day of the Bloody Sunday killings. Last Sunday, he emerged from a screening of the film to pose for pictures with its stars and say that addressing such a hard subject was to 'the eternal credit' of the English. Today, Mr McGuinness is Education Minister of Northern Ireland with tough issues of his own to tackle.  He was 'appalled and disgusted' at the new diaspora of violence, in which Protestant secondary pupils got bused home in armoured vehicles. ('Cry, cry,' a bystander is said to have urged, as the TV cameras swivelled on the victims.) On the same day, girls from Our Lady of Mercy School were caged like zoo animals behind a grille; rosy-cheeked hostages with blonde ponytails, pictured in the most telegenic battle zone on Earth.  As befits the Brookside of terror, Belfast attracts guest celebrities. Archbishop Desmond Tutu has visited Holy Cross, Hillary Clinton has sent good wishes and Oprah Winfrey has offered airtime for a show on terrorism. If ordinary people play to the cameras, they are only following the standards set by politicians. Throughout the peace process, it seemed that no deal could be brokered or progress made without film crews, mascara brushes and Blair or Clinton to edge things along.  And now the bigger show has gone on tour. The Prime Minister offers, on the basis of the conflict resolution skills he honed in Belfast, global anti-terrorism masterclasses and, for the fortunate, the peace-keeping services of the Parachute Regiment. The spotlight has moved from Northern Ireland, and a country that fed off terror and glitter in equal doses must get down to the travails (dismal, as Mr Blair could have told them) of domestic business. Last week's pictures offer the first real test of homegrown politics. It is possible that the task will be less hard than the cameras suggest. Sectarian hatred has always prospered in a clot of half-a-dozen streets in north Belfast. Experts say that recent surveys claiming community segregation has intensified are selective and misleading. But there is cold news, too. A loyalist boy is blown apart in Coleraine by the pipe bomb he is carrying. A Catholic postman is shot dead as he arrives for work in Belfast.  And Mr McGuinness goes to the movies and remembers how things used to be. I first met him on a December day in Derry in 1994, as the Government announced it would see Sinn Fein in the first public forum since the partition of Ireland. Expecting a dour man and a bleak backdrop, I found a radiant triumphalist in a city arranged for cosmopolitan gift-hunters and strung with Christmas lights. Mr McGuinness (who said he had been out with his wife shopping for a bathroom carpet) is, like Mr Blair, a skilful, broad-brush populist with Mandela dreams.  He must feel grateful. After years of silence, two films and an inquiry heed the voice of Derry's victims. The truth is long overdue. Whether celluloid justice or Lord Saville's marathon are landmarks of enduring peace is quite another matter. Last week's violence offered echoes of a loathing in which only the power balance has shifted. The Protestant oppressors of the Seventies have become today's paramilitaries, lashing out against the flourishing of nationalism and their own lost dominion.  As Mr McGuinness and his colleagues address that problem, they have two filmed images to drive their efforts. The first is the terrible reprise of Bloody Sunday. The second is the footage of the Holy Cross girls; juvenile conscripts to an intractable war. Three thousand people have died since the Paras opened fire in Derry and the talk is of closure and justice. Such piety sounds hollow when, in the ghettos of Belfast, children are publicly baptised into the cult of sectarian hatred, as they were 30 years ago.