When a previous Dean of Windsor told the Queen that he was leaving office, Her Majesty issued the drayhorse snort with which she is said to preface tart remarks. 'You're retiring?' she said. 'Humph. I can't.' Almost 50 years have passed since she took over, and there is scant chance that Elizabeth II will oblige the quarter of Britons who think, according to The Observer's recent poll, that she should abdicate when she reaches her golden jubilee next month. Plans are set for a national tour and spring pageants. On the day that the pound sunk to 62.4 pence against the euro, the Royal Mint unveiled the £5 jubilee crown commemorating half a century on the throne. Europe gets a new currency; Britain is favoured with an equestrian portrait of its monarch, struck in cupronickel for collectors.  Lucky us. The jubilee year has barely begun and already pro-monarchists are issuing defensive homilies warning against any sour critiques of the Queen as an inadequate mother, crusty reactionary or brand leader of a country marred by snobbery and the notion that status is determined by pedigree, not by worth. We are fortunate, they say, to have a monarch who has suffered duty and public prurience without complaint. We have just emerged from a grim year, so put the worries over world terrorism and the Asti Spumante on ice. Dust off the bunting. It is time to celebrate.  Supporters of the Queen veer between admirers who see her as the epitome of gracious selflessness and those who think her an overprivileged tax-avoider in a bad hat but do not like to say so. Even the most avid tumbrel-rollers rarely offer up a public hymn to republicanism without adding an unctuous codicil on the success and sacrifices of Her Majesty. Admirable though the Queen may be, subsisting in an assortment of palaces on a vast personal fortune bolstered by an annual £8.9 million from the Civil List is a sybaritic life. Being royal has horrible aspects, but a mixture of modest duties and lavish wealth explains why the Windsors are mostly so tough.  The Queen, like her mother, is supposedly immutable in habit and credo. That trait is vaunted as a virtue by those who adore her and a sin by her critics. Neither group notices that the monarchy, far from being becalmed, is evolving at a gallop. In 1977, the Queen's silver jubilee year, a chain of celebration bonfires stretched from Land's End to the Shetlands, her subjects held street parties in a carnival mood unseen since 1945, and she embarked on a 56,000-mile tour of the world and all her kingdoms.  A quarter of a century on, the Windsors' nomadic role has been usurped by the travelling Blairs. It's hard to envisage even a husk of the old Gawd-bless-you-Ma'am revelry in the streets. And still we are invited to laud the seamless continuum of monarchy and to embrace the myth of a queen and country cryogenically preserved as a late-Fifties curio. But this jubilee is more about her subjects than about her. Every nostalgic article, every television retrospective featuring acolytes who sound like strangled capons, plays to the sentiments of those who abominate change and seek to decipher, in a silent Queen, a touchstone of their own prejudices against evils ranging from a European superstate to teenage sex.  The mood for a republic increases at a creep. It is not fired by constitutional iniquities, such as the Act of Settlement, which decrees that only Protestant heirs of Princess Sophia may have the British throne. The Countess of Wessex taking tea with a bogus sheikh, or Prince Andrew sailing with topless sunbathers are more likely to propel opinion in the direction of President Branson, but only briefly. When around half the population still thinks Prince Charles should choose between marrying his mistress and the throne, the rusty mindset of subjects and the sovereignty seem synchronised. Britain has the monarchy it deserves.  Early golden jubilee effusions imply a terror that this conservative compact may not be maintained. Eulogies to the Queen reek of the Hilaire Belloc mantra: 'Be sure and keep a hold of nurse, for fear of finding something worse.' Reactionaries deplore Prince Charles, a social improver and a declared defender of all faiths. And then there is the new pretender.  It seems ironic that Tony Blair, constitutional reformer and meritocrat, should have moved so silkily into the monarch's terrain. Crown prerogative, which hoards all executive power at the centre, permits British Prime Ministers to govern with a cursory nod to Parliament. Mr Blair has gone one better. His manner is presidential, and his parish global. The Queen has more or less swapped rat dinners with Commonwealth leaders for awaydays to Royal Ascot, RMT permitting, and public pats on the head from a Prime Minister telling her she is 'the best of British'.  If the Blairs are ersatz royalty, then the soap opera has shifted, almost wholesale, from the monarchy to glamour-lite politics. The Blair babes' dress sense comes under fire. Stephen Byers jets off to India. Although the Windsors will not mourn being eased off the front pages, there is a narrow margin between privacy and irrelevance. The monarchy, starved of influence and publicity, would be more marginalised than it is, but for the fact that the British are bad iconoclasts.  Even the least respectful citizens will probably have watched a televised Windsor wedding. Hardened hacks reportedly turn into bashful curtseyers when introduced to royalty. But the British disease is not ingrained deference so much as a lack of new objects of reverence. Religion, like fusty royalty, has lost its thrall, but every international disaster leaves a God-shaped hole in which church congregations swell and a secular society fails to provide a locus or a language for desolation and horror. Just as the anti-corporate movement is faltering, because it cannot offer a cogent alternative, so moves to create a more modern and equal society here seem doomed to stall.  There are many reasons. There isn't the will. No one can think of a non-repellent presidential candidate for a republic. The British, transfixed by the 1901 census website, are ancestor-worshippers, fixated on the past. In an age of epic plotlines, we are good at fleshing out evil geniuses, from Hussein to bin Laden, but bad at finding gurus who inspire. The current inertia is about more than shoring up old symbols of power or the social inequality that is practically enshrined in the constitution. Dislike of radical change also underpins our useless railway and bad hospitals. It explains why, as the euro takes off, much of Britain feels smug to be left behind.  In a numbed-down country, one unwitting agent of revolution slogs on. The Queen's aversion to modernity, praised by anonymous courtiers as her jubilee begins, signals her wish for much more of the same. Even in conservative Britain, current trends suggest that course will lead to a slow dwindling of enthusiasm for an atrophying institution. Irrespective of any outside pressure, the monarchy may be incubating its own destruction. And then we will be forced to think of something else.