The picture doing the furtive rounds in Merseyside is a digital shot of a teenage boy. Three-quarters visible, he is walking in the shadow of an adult male companion. The boy's face is clear but not distinctive. Vigilantes say this is Robert Thompson, who killed James Bulger, but young adults are an amorphous tribe. Sift through any football crowd and you would find a dozen near-replicas of the photo face. The lynch mob, in seeking to pursue Thompson, may harm or murder someone else by mistake. There are no certainties if the picture goes public. Most probably, it will. Tomorrow, the parole board will begin two separate hearings on the release of Thompson and Jon Venables, who have served the eight-year tariff set by the Lord Chief Justice for James's murder and are expected to be freed before their nineteenth birthdays in August. 'Kill them,' the crowd screamed as the boys, aged 10, were driven from Preston Crown Court. That hatred, unassuaged, drives those who believe that, when the state goes soft, hard men must sculpt their own justice. Although the Attorney General, Lord Goldsmith, last week warned the media to observe the lifetime ban protecting the killers' identity, it seems likely that the alleged snapshot of Thompson will be posted on a foreign website. If so, the only recourse might be to widen Dame Elizabeth Butler-Sloss's injunction and prevent the image being printed on 'Wanted' posters here. When global communication emasculates the law, the media and citizens grow powerful.  The endgame of James Bulger's murder is a showcase for warped potency. A Sunday People story alleging that Thompson had tried to strangle a boy with a flex collapsed when it emerged that he was the victim, not the aggressor. The paper's account of another fight was a lie based on crudely-forged documents. On Thursday, BBC2 will screen a 'personal' account of the murder by Albert Kirby. Since Kirby was the senior investigating police officer, it seems doubtful that he has any business getting personal.  If his kitchen-table chats with Denise Fergus, James's mother, look unprofessional, then his recall of how the crime scene suggested 'sexual perversion' is worryingly bizarre. Channel 4's  Dispatches last week exploded widespread, much-repeated stories of sexual violation, suggestive of an even viler crime and a greater propensity to reoffend. The pathologist who examined James Bulger's body told the programme there were no such injuries. Why does the detail matter now? Because of the bearing on the killers' minds, but also because old images are indelible. A child is led from a shopping centre, his fist placed trustingly in the hand of a bigger boy. A small corpse lies on a railway line, the head smashed by an iron plate and the body severed by a train. The picture may not alter. The interpretation does. Shock and sorrow fermented, long ago, to poison.  Thompson and Venables will emerge from their secure units as novice human beings. A few shopping trips or outings to Old Trafford, deplored by the right-wing press, are not a training in how to live. On one hand, the boys know nothing. On the other, their experience exceeds anything a normal 18-year-old could countenance or bear. If, as they must, they watch television and read newspapers, they take the weight not only of guilt but of the leaden hatred of those claiming the purest of motives.  In a society so muddled about children, mixed messages are nothing new. We cut down the chestnut trees of Bluebell Road, Norwich, lest a schoolboy be harmed by a falling conker, but we send 17-year-olds to war. We are terrified for our children and by our children in equal measure. Thus Thompson and Venables are demonised as pack leaders of the curfew kids, robbers, joyriders and all those perceived as the architects of social blight rather than its victims. Then there is James Bulger, bouncing on his trampoline with his gold curls swaying and viewed proprietorially by anyone ever beguiled by a small child's milky scent. Commentators always refer to him as 'Jamie', as if he were their own baby. His real parents have only ever called him James.  But vulnerability has other faces, In addition to the new Thompson picture, whose existence was revealed in Deborah Davies's rigorous and thoughtful  Dispatches , the programme contained previously unseen pictures of the killers aged 10. Newspapers which copied the Venables shot, technically covered by the publicity ban, have been reported to the Attorney General. He is unlikely to act. The issue is not identification but the unease instilled by sweet-faced boys with rosebud lips and a leaning to kill. Now, it seems, they are cured and we are not. What sort of society produces vigilantes who exploit a dead child's memory as justification for revenge? Who do we blame? In part, the media avengers. In part, Michael Howard, who applied an illegal, crowd-pleasing tariff. In part, a yearning to punish rather than to save.  Eighty per cent of those sent to the 'corrosive' young offenders institutions deplored by Lord Woolf reoffend within two years. A trickle of children get killed or hang themselves in their cells. The lassitude evoked by such brutality inevitably creates a climate in which some lives are deemed more expendable than others. When Ralph Bulger, James's father, spoke of 'hunting down' Thompson and Venables, he elicited much private sympathy and scarcely any public expression of revulsion. Denise Fergus, while dignified and brave, believes the courts had a duty to honour her wish that the boys should graduate to punishment in adult jail.  Maybe she was encouraged by unwise political and judicial emphasis on victims' voices to believe that sorrow constitutes a parallel jurisdiction. Now, although she does not condone plans to publish the Thompson picture, her spokesman is reported as saying that 'she understands the feelings and motives of anyone who might feel driven to flout the law. She would not condemn them for acting out of frustration'.  While Mrs Fergus's grief places her beyond reproach, such a sanction is chilling. The protest movement she founded may abhor vigilantes, but its creed of unforgivingness is a crucible for less scrupulous forces. The Justice For James campaign now looks anachronistic, even threatening. Its time is up. Justice, irrespective of the name tag stitched to it, has been done. There is no cause to fight and no prize to win, beyond the ruin of other lives. Somehow, those who advise Mrs Fergus have to tell her that. As for the vengeful wing of the media, expect a wave of bloodlust when the Home Office announces that Thompson and Venables are to be released on licence.  Last week, Timothy McVeigh died in sanitised peace after a litre of mint choc-chip ice-cream and a poetry reading. This week, barring a last-minute reprieve, Juan Garza will follow him to the Terre Haute execution chamber as civilised Britain shivers over America's lack of clemency. Does the absence of a death penalty make us less barbarous? Not when a brutal or misguided minority sees Robert Thompson and Jon Venables, punished now and hopefully redeemed, as dead men walking.