In the annals of royal oafishness, the Countess of Wessex's verdict on 'horrid' Cherie gets only a modest shockometer rating. Sophie has not, unlike the Prince of Wales, compared herself to a Tampax. She has avoided the bigotry of the Duke of Edinburgh, who once noted that a wire-stuffed fusebox must have been 'put in by an Indian'. Her passions do not mirror those of the Queen Mother (Dubonnet, gin and P.W. Botha), nor her loathings those of the Princess Royal (elderly ladies proferring floral baskets.) Few members of what the late Princess Diana once called 'that fucking family' have sidestepped controversy, including the Queen, who riskily complained to Ronald Reagan about the impossible burdens the welfare state put on democracies. The role and future of a monarchy with more constitutional loose ends than Philip's fusebox is again being questioned as a result of the Wessex playgroup taunts. Although it is possible that new revelations will constitute an authentic scandal, the row so far has been driven chiefly by snobbery.  While those whose gene-pool originated in the primeval Windsor soup are permitted to be as racist or offensive as they wish, such courtesies stop short of a jumped-up PR woman who might be marketing pizza toppings but for ensnaring the Queen's least alluring son in a deal entitling her to generous state subsidy, a country pile and B&amp;B at Buckingham Palace. A notion that such effrontery must be punished has led to the sort of attrition more usually inflicted by a piranha shoal on a dead buffalo.  Sophie Rhys-Jones has now had every vestige of privacy filleted away. In last    week's  News of the World interview, granted to stop the paper publishing tapes of her indiscretions, she dutifully discussed her husband's sexuality and her fertility (he isn't gay and she might consider IVF). Those confessions, approved by courtiers, form a neat sequel to the  Sun 's decision, two years ago, to print a topless picture bought for £100,000 by the editor, David Yelland, who was thought to have the support of his then deputy, Rebekah Wade. As editor of the  News of the World, Ms Wade was responsible for the sting under which 'Sheikh' Mazher Mahmood, the paper's undercover agent, elicited the Rhys-Jones remarks over champagne and surveillance bugs. But this time round, Ms Wade was initially less eager to reveal all. Indeed, it seemed possible that the  NoW , anxious about Palace wrath, was groping for the exit handily illuminated by Simon Walker, the Queen's communications director.  If the countess is not very good at personal PR, then Mr Walker could not lend a camel to a stranded sheikh. The Palace's course of bartering suppression for an interview seems inexplicable, unless it was done in blind panic or at the sage behest of Lord Wakeham, the chairman of the Press Complaints Commission. Wakeham denies this, claiming that 'as far as I can recall', the first he heard about an interview was after it had taken place. Given this short-term memory problem, it is possible that Wakeham may not fully recollect his role in the topless pictures episode, from which he emerged with little credit after administering a mild rebuke to Yelland.  Since then, however, Wakeham has become very intertwined with royalty, famously attracting Charles, Camilla and William to his PCC anniversary party. As a helpmate to the mighty, he guided the Prime Minister through the row over Leo's snatched christening pictures and, in the Sophie d&eacute;bcle, he gave the Palace 'exactly the same advice that the PCC offers to countless members of the public'. Except that the harassed   masses do not have a hotline to his lordship. But whether or not the Palace sought or got a bespoke service prior to its disastrous course of action, Wakeham needs to worry, as do we all, that the weird spectacle of the royal family invading its own privacy may portend less a Rabelaisian feast of intrusion than a backlash of greater restriction.  While the Wakeham intervention, however minor, looks ill-starred, the  News of the World emerges with much less credit. Mr Mahmood must have been livid that his scoop was sacrificed to a bit of vulgar, Palace-blessed twaddle, whose fall-out is unlikely to trouble the silkily efficient Mark Bolland, spin doctor to the Prince of Wales. Charles is thought to welcome any evidence that minor royals should get the boot, a wish that ignores the fact that major ones look more contaminated. If Edward Wessex is a charmless self-promoter with a penchant for a fast buck, then such traits are hardly remarkable in the child of someone who is worth £50 million, saves old string and long believed that income tax was something that one's poor people paid.  Despite the public discontent reflected in the royal family's recent private polling, it remains poor form to criticise the Queen. Hence the widespread fondness for displacement activities, such as rubbishing her vulgar daughter-in-law. But if Rhys-Jones is guilty of confusing her roles and exploiting her position, she is only playing by the long-established rules of a ramshackle monarchy whose wizened tentacles extend into politics, religion and the petty-cash tin. If we don't like the institution, we should argue for its demise rather than indulging in squeaky outrage if   Sophie calls the Queen the 'old dear' or gloating every time Princess Margaret has another stroke. Royal-baiting, at that level, is only a buy-in to the out-of-touch heartlessness we affect to deplore.  Increasingly, the monarchy exists as a licence for hypocrisy, as peddled by citizens and government. While any hint from Mo Mowlam that the royals might settle for futons and Ikea sofas is greeted as almost treasonable, Margaret Beckett, Kim ('A bit bonkers') Howells and Stephen Byers are presumed to bask in Blair's approval for upbraiding a woman whose garrulous ways may contain some lessons for on-message Blairites.If only Mr Byers were more seducible by fake sheikhs bearing champagne, how much better informed on trade and industry we all might be. More relevantly, politicians should be less worried by the confected Sophie scandal than by the constitutional implications of Charles the moderniser cleaving to all the monarchy's arcane powers while pursuing a new, quasi-political agenda on GM food, the countryside and squaring science with 'a sense of the sacred'.  Miss Rhys-Jones, for her part, fits more neatly into the world of the profane. That should not diminish the fact that she deserves heroine status if, as seems just possible, her indiscretions finally prompt the debate we should have had long ago on what the royals are for. But even if the current, frothed-up fuss subsides and Sophie, so abysmally served by allies and enemies, is forced to abandon PR for a less controversial career, such as aromatherapy or promoting Britain's interests abroad, she has had her moment of glory.  Not only has she provided the  Emmerdale-in-ermine pageantry we demand of an otherwise otiose monarchy; she has also, inadvertently, highlighted the methodology of politicians, courtiers, royals, regulators and sections of the press. If the charge is venality, then the Countess of Wessex has proved that, in such distinguished company, she is merely a promising beginner. <B>Useful links</B><BR>R-JH public relations<BR>Buckingham palace biography of Duke of Wessex<BR>Sophie Wessex fan site