On a dark evening several months ago, my teenage son was stopped at the end of the road by a bigger boy who asked him to turn out his pockets and hand over his mobile phone. The mugger said he was carrying a knife. This minor incident seemed unlikely to raise a flicker of interest from the police, but they behaved as if confronted with a reprise of the Great Train Robbery. Friendly officers camped in our kitchen and took multiple statements. They drove my son round the district to see if he could spot his assailant, which he did. They urged him to pick the boy out at an identity parade and, subsequently, to give evidence in court. The process took weeks and my son grew frightened. He said that he would be identified as a grass and beaten up whenever he walked home late. I said, piously, that it was his duty to co-operate to save anyone else being threatened or hurt. Besides, he would have wasted hours of police time if he pulled out. As it transpired, the helpful officers were wasting their own. We were driven miles to the parade, installed in a waiting-room for an hour and dismissed.  The suspect's solicitor had, quite properly, objected that no one in the line-up resembled his client and demanded that the procedure be aborted. There would be a replay, the police said, in another part of London better supplied with phone-snatcher lookalikes. They would let us know the date. We never heard from them again.  I suppose such pointless and expensive exercises go on constantly, hence Jack Straw's move last week to shift the pressure to mobile phone companies. Thefts are fuelling the rise in street muggings. Ergo, the manufacturers must improve product security. If it worked for cars, it will work for phones. Another Home Office winner, except that car thieves are specific in their targets. Teenage muggers are less focused. The real object for the bully-boy element is not to cut a resale deal or do something clever with a phone smart card but to assert power and secure a trophy. Anything would do.  At the sinister end of the spectrum, police now surmise that the murder of Damilola Taylor was part of a new pattern in which attackers 'mark' their victims with a slash wound denoting the stamp of the controller on the controlled. This week, Damilola will be laid to rest in a private funeral. Recorded crime statistics, due out in a few days, are expected to show yet another rise in youth-on-youth violence. Police numbers dwindle and beat cops are such a spectral presence that the force, if wishing to emulate Consignia (the Post Office, as was) might usefully rebrand itself Etherea.  Something must be done on youth crime. But what, exactly? By a curious irony, the Government's half-baked phone initiative coincided with one of the greatest lessons of our time on redeeming violent children. The treatment of James Bulger's killers is a tribute to the best in teaching and rehabilitation and a testament to the humanity of the judicial system. Against a backdrop of escalating crime and grim young offenders' institutions, the transformation of Robert Thompson and Jon Venables into educated, repentant young men is a beacon of what a decent society should aspire to.  No one said so. Not William Hague, who spent the week embroidering his vision of bogeyman Britain. Not Jack Straw, who was busy berating Nokia. No political voice countered the cries for vengeance in the debate that followed Dame Elizabeth Butler-Sloss's correct decision to give the boys their anonymity on release. The agenda of hatred was led by the Sun, replete with details of the supposedly sybaritic lives of killers permitted to see videos and watch Shakespeare (hardly the high watermark of teenage roistering), when natural justice should decree a life spent fleeing newsdesk scrutineers and brutish vigilantes.  It would be wrong, however, to single out newspapers as the sole crucible of loathing for boys who will remain notorious long after the names of Anna Climbie's killers have slipped from memory. The fulcrum of press interest is Denise Fergus, who wants her son's killers 'haunted and hunted'. In her television interview with Martin Bashir, she denied seeking revenge but could not bring herself to say that she did not wish harm to befall them. Mrs Fergus's sorrow rightly puts her beyond criticism. It does not place her beyond influence.  The suspicion is that solicitors or advisers have encouraged her to believe that her views, on sentencing and punishment, should constitute a surrogate form of law. Her despair, on learning that it is not so, nourishes a heartbreak that spills over into papers harnessing her anguish as justification for their frenzy. To break such vicious circles is hard.  For parents who have lost children to violence, there is no normal land to reclaim. Some, like Colin Parry, whose son was murdered at Warrington, or Diana Lamplugh, sublimate their grief in work for the public good. Even then, release is not an option. Gordon Wilson, the draper whose daughter, Marie, was killed in the Enniskillen bombing, became an Irish senator and a crusader against conflict. As an old man, he demanded to meet the IRA, who gave him orange juice and buns and listened, in a mood he interpreted as silent scorn, to his imprecations.  He died several years later, alone in his bedroom, with his papers spread in front of him. His wife told me that he had worked himself to death, in the knowledge that the peace he strove for would forever elude him.  There is another, bleaker course. Ann West, mother of one of the Moors victims, railed from her deathbed against Myra Hindley, the author of her daughter's death and her own, ruined life. The fate of corrosive misery without limit seems to be the route down which Denise Fergus is being steered by those who fail to tell her that the public, though it weeps for her, no longer shares her cause. The mood on the street is that justice has been done and the tariff paid. The wish is that the Bulger killers should be left, undisturbed, to face the huge and perhaps insuperable difficulties facing them. But who dares publicly to hail their impending release as a milestone in justice and rehabilitation?  Instead, the legacy of the case is a cold collation of spite and bitterness. The press has been muzzled because it cannot be trusted not to imperil the boys' lives and nurture the desires of ill-wishers, Ralph Bulger included, who threaten to hunt them down. For newspapers to complain that a dangerous precedent has been set is pointless now. Press freedom, however sacrosanct, is not to be bought in blood. Myra Hindley should have her anonymity, too, if she ever genuinely faces execution as a result of media-confected rage.  And it is confected. The danger is that the focus on a retributive minority hints, falsely but perilously, at a cruel society to which redemption is anathema. No wonder youth crime is a problem. How are the juvenile bullies, the phone-snatchers and the slashers to absorb a sense of mercy when the available evidence tells them how fixated grown-ups are on savagery?