Call me a foot-dragger, but I am not certain the moment is right for an all-out push to abolish the monarchy. What with tracking down the last PlayStation 2 on the planet, amassing Bob the Builder stocking-fillers and meeting Christmas postal deadlines (circa last October, due to rail crisis), it seems possible that the nation's mind is not fully concentrated on the iniquities of the Act of Settlement 1701.  The Guardian joined the royal debate  with a call to amend or scrub the Act, which stipulates that only Protestant heirs of Princess Sophia may take the British throne. Thereafter, the royal family should, in time, admit that the game is up and that a modern country needs a republic, as The Observer has been urging now for some time. How soon the House of Windsor might be ushered out of Balmoral and into a retirement bungalow with the ermine in the loft and Dunroyallin on the gate is a matter for conjecture.  Never, say those delighted by last week's supposed counter-offensive to republican forces. Study the reporting of Prince William's gap year in Chile and marvel at the veneration accorded to the royals. Express newspapers excelled in their coverage, notching up 17 pages on the Willometer over two days, and others were not far behind in epic accounts of the prince's porridge-making exploits and laudable humility (noblesse o' bleach?) in scrubbing lavatories.  The community William visited did not rate as a blackspot of humanity. On infant mortality figures, Chile fares better than Bahrain and not much worse than Belgium. Of course, you might not send a privileged 18-year-old to Burundi or Mali, but neither might you expect his sacrifices (no bed to sleep in, no forelock-tuggers) wholly to eclipse last week's Unicef report noting that 11 million children die each year from preventable diseases, 170 million are malnourished and 100 million never see a classroom, let alone one equipped with an heir to the throne scrawling wombats on the blackboard.  Clare Short's White Paper on globalisation and the poor didn't get much of a look in either. Nor did the Joseph Rowntree Foundation's report on slow progress in alleviating poverty and social exclusion at home. Saving the dispossessed was the sole province of William, whose exploits were deemed to have the useful, knock-on effect of also rescuing the monarchy. As Melanie McDonagh noted reverentially in the Daily Mail: 'Truly, Prince William is the best chance the Royal Family has for its survival.'  So how did this exercise in salvation come about? The trinity of the press, St James's Palace and the Press Complaints Commission has never been particularly holy. Earlier this year, the Prince of Wales complained to the PCC after the News of the World published pictures of his son at school. Another picture, purporting to show William 'jungle-training in Belize', turned out to have been shot on Salisbury Plain. The official birthday portfolio of the prince in Union Jack waistcoat and Eton tails resulted in a row over copyright and the resignation of a palace fixer.  It also taught editors that William does not necessarily sell papers. The Eton pictures, published in a splurge almost as munificent as the gap year travelogue, wiped 200,000 copies off the sales of five tabloids. But by then the prince was 18 and bigger issues were at stake. Palace officials believed that British newspapers were likely to stalk William to Chile. What else to do but despatch a film crew and a Press Association team to slake media interest, particularly at a time when the royals crave publicity and an image-building campaign is afoot to portray Charles as a socially-aware prince who can be both pointy-head (tackling GM issues) and populist (a walk-on part in Coronation Street).  How tempting to extend the mood of glasnost to his son, and how easy to go over the top. If there had been only a few pictures, no backlash would have followed. Despite the lure of a publicity blitz which gave William hardly fewer ITV viewers (5.1 million against 5.2) than the Prime Minister's 'real issues' broadcast, I would guess that shrewder influences at the palace had a frisson of worry. The weight of coverage looked as excessive as the corset-popping effusions offered by the BBC's Jenny Bond and others. In addition, the universal assumption that William was his mother reincarnate sounded trite and creepy.  Note the caring touch. Marvel at the telegenic manner. And ignore the fact that Diana was a disturbed, damaged attention-seeker whose hospice visiting was poised uneasily between compassion and manipulation. How disingenuous, or even cruel, of the press to seek to steer William down the same route of flawed sanctity, and how unwise of the palace not to see that the eulogies would swiftly degenerate into griping about the absurd focus on a pampered teenager.  I actually feel sorry for William, who looks a nice enough boy. How is he supposed to react if advisers tell him that that lavatory-scouring will keep the hounds of hell at bay? How, at 18, can he gauge the inevitable result? Deep in the Express's unctuous reporting was a mordant footnote. 'The media will not always be able meekly to accept reports and pictures approved, Kremlin-style, by the Palace. It will expect reasonable access to report on our future king.' In other words, the gloves are off.  Adult members of the royal family are public figures, supported by the public purse. They should expect reasonable scrutiny. Even so, this warning is ominous news for the Windsors. Royalty is rather like chutney - best-preserved under hermetic seal and prone to moulder once the lid is lifted. Publicity has damaged the monarchy, if not yet gravely. One in four people wants an elected head of state, rising to one in three among Labour voters and the William age-group. Monarchists and the undecided will not, for now, be swayed by the small print. The elaborate knitting of constitutional anomalies, however due for unpicking, is not the cue for tricoteuses to gather.  The growing unease that does exist coalesces instead around the issues of living in an arcane, recidivist, Eurosceptic country, puffed up on ceremony and the crumbled imperial dreams symbolised by monarchy. Businesses may rot, Vauxhall may founder, but all will yet be well as long as we hang on to our grandiose ideas of nationhood and our own currency with the Queen's head on it. However dimly, the modernisers in the royal family are aware of this disquiet. Once the mystique of royalty hinged on the assumption that we wanted to be just like them. Now they want, up to a very limited point, to be just like us.  Hence the projection of ordinary William, an emblem of social conscience and modern manners and the potential saviour of the British monarchy. But recent history suggests that the stuffier the royal presence, the less trouble ensues. And besides, the saccharine idyll is already dented. The media will not want to play the game of sycophantic image-building for much longer, and neither may a prince with a taste for freedom and all his growing-up to do.  What happens then is anybody's guess. While it is possible that national fury over Crown prerogative may yet connive at the extinction of the monarchy, it is probable that the fissile reaction between the anti-republican press and a royal family it professes to adore will provide better fuel for the tumbrels.