He was a studious boy, observant of the Bible and so quiet that bullies used to pick on him at school. His mother brought him from Lagos in Nigeria to London in search of a decent education and a better life. That bright future expired in a dank block of flats in Peckham, where he was found, a few yards from home, dying of a stab wound. This is not Damilola Taylor but Shola Agoro, who was killed nine days previously and a few hundred yards away from the grubby stairwell where Damilola perished.  No Government Ministers offered outrage or regret. No bewildered strangers dropped flowers where Shola fell. No closed-circuit cameras captured his last steps. 'He was my angel, my baby, my best friend,' his mother said, but few outside her family were invited to share her grief. The death of Shola Agoro went almost unremarked. Publicity, or lack of it, aside, there were only two variants in the parallel lives and fates of the two boys. Police have charged a youth with Shola's murder while no suspects have been traced in connection with Damilola's stabbing.  But the real difference was one of age. Damilola was 10. Shola was 17; too young to vote, too young to have completed his engineering diploma, but old enough to become one more statistic in a litany of violence in a place where the stabbing of young men is too humdrum to register on the Richter scale of public shock.  Of course, the murder of a 10-year-old is especially horrific. The dignity, the tears and the televised mourning of Damilola's family at his memorial service last week provoked a tide of sympathy and collective guilt. Beforehand, journalists made their pilgrimage to his home in Lagos and discovered, in sand streets where chickens scratched and children trekked to spartan classrooms, the seeds of what British society has supposedly squandered. This was a place where family values counted for something, reported those too moved by the lure of simplicity and communalism to note the corruption, the exponential rise in armed robbery or the fact that almost five murders a day are logged in a city where crime goes largely unreported and those who escape violence are likely to die of natural causes before they reach 50.  And besides, look what miracles a rich society can perform for children. The most compelling portrait of last week was the dimpled infant fist of Jodie, the surviving conjoined twin, clamped round her father's finger. Here was an emblem of Britain's ability to marshal medical science and judicial wisdom to secure a child's life. How everyone loves a fairy-tale ending. And how quickly they forget that only weeks have passed since the Roman Catholic Church and assorted doctors and commentators clamoured that Jodie should, in the name of morality or humanity, be left to die.  If her case reeks of ambivalence, then so does our attitude to children in general. We hype up the terror of murderers and abusers, rarely seeing how good intentions blur into mawkish sentiment and hysteria. Anyone in doubt over the prevalence of sex abuse in care homes and outside should reread Sir William Utting's damning report in 1997. Three years on, David Jones, a former football manager and care worker, is acquitted of abuse in a case that exposed the flaws of police work and the CPS. A dead priest is accused of paedophilia in a media storm in which evidence of culpability is secondary to the piquancy of the fact that he worked at the school attended by the Prime Minister's sons. Meanwhile, the NSPCC becomes the National Society For The Protection Of Corporate Culture. Its annual report suggested (a conclusion the charity disputes) that pen-pushers and advertisers fared better from its beneficence than abused children. The current appetite for naming, shaming and incarcerating for ever the armies of paedophiles perceived to be preying on our kids is not a spur to action. Screeches for something to be done merely occlude the suspicion that vast amounts of money are being spent on not doing it.  But the real contradiction over how children are supported and protected resides with government. In several ways, Labour has had a good week. Stephen Byers' Green Paper on working parents finally acknowledges that babies do better if their parents get enough time off. Two weeks paid paternity leave and an increase in statutory maternity pay from £60.20 to £100 a week, with the option of an extension of leave for a year, remains Scrooge-like by the standards of Paris or Stockholm. It is, however, a nod in the right direction.  So is Tessa Jowell's explosion of the 'marriage-is-best' strategy. She doesn't want a family policy that makes 'some children feel they are first-class and others second-class'. All must be equally valued, cherished and made to feel worthy as long as their childhood endures. The pity is that others in Government set such a short expiry date. When do children stop being the potential prey of monsters and emerge as aggressors in their own right?  Around the age of Damilola Taylor, according to the rules of matriculation into Jack Straw's yob culture. Henceforth, those between 10 and 13 found loitering after 10pm may be removed under curfew orders designed to underpin the Home Secretary's dislike of under-16s 'racketing' round the streets. That is what most teenagers do. But it will not be your child, or mine, who is delivered in a police van after being intercepted on a ramble home from a party.  Given the police's lukewarm response, it may not be anyone's child. That does not diminish the Alice-in- Wonderland perversity of a policy that criminalises non-offending children in the hope of decriminalising them. There are more effective, quieter initiatives in place for turning children away from violence, but pointless, harmful measures supposedly play better to the mood decreeing that family breakdown inevitably breeds trainee 'yobs'.  Of course there is a link between poverty and bad parenting and crime. But to wish to feed a criminal underclass with a Government-created army of mini-conscripts is as absurd as the idea that sober, Christian, family values are a guarantor of perfect outcomes. If they had been observed, then Jodie, now a symbol of survival in a toy-packed cot, would be dying or dead.  But that is history now. So, soon, will be the brief flurry of national mourning for Damilola; a mood awkwardly rooted in comfort as well as in grief. The murder of a 10-year-old remains a rare aberration. So does the threat of the paedophile-at-large, but how much easier it is to deal with horrors unlikely to befall our children rather than to confront the fact that the vast majority of victims are other people's children assaulted by one of their own family in their own homes.  As for Shola Agoro, still only a child at 17, he will remain one crime statistic among many. Too young to die, too old for martyrdom, his memory will be unruffled by hot gusts of public emotion and political posturing on solutions for a violent society. In the absence of easy answers, it is safe only to assume that the real problem centres not on those we vow to remember but on those whom we choose to forget.  <B>Related special report</B><BR>Policing crime<BR><BR>  <B>Related stories</B><BR>30 November: Straw appeals to public after 'evil' schoolboy murder   <BR>30 November: 'My son is dead and I am bitter'     <BR>30 November, leader: Death in Peckham     <BR>30 November: Head defends bullying record     <BR>30 November: Estate is 'one of toughest in Europe'    <BR>29 November: Death of a schoolboy   <BR>29 November: It's lawless out there<BR><BR><B>Useful links</B><BR>Metropolitan police  <BR>The home office     <BR>Ofsted report: the Oliver Goldsmith primary school     <BR>Local media: South London online    <BR>London borough of Southwark    <BR>Photographs of the North Peckham estate