The case of James Bulger's murder began with a blurred surveillance shot of two boys, one big and one small, walking hand in hand from a shopping centre. It ended on a November evening in 1993, as Robert Thompson and Jon Venables left Preston Crown Court with the sentence of the mob upon them. 'Kill them. Hang them,' screamed the crowd, wishing the blue police vans bearing two 11-year-olds were bound for Tyburn rather than for cosy, council secure units specialising in the makeover of monsters.By contrast, the final act in sentencing the Bulger killers was a low-key affair. The court of the Lord Chief Justice was half empty for Thursday's ruling, delivered by Lord Woolf in the mild and slightly halting manner of a newly-recruited Chatsworth tour guide. Several reporters bolted to file their stories at the mention of an unexpectedly low eight-year sentence, so missing Woolf's quiet punchline. 'I therefore set a tariff which will expire today,' he said, as Denise Fergus, James's mother, sunk her face towards the gold crucifix hanging round her neck.There were few talismans, in the subsequent reporting, of the triumph of good over evil. Instead, the gruesome details of the premeditated abduction, the paint poured into James's eyes, the crash of an iron railway plate on an infant skull and the body placed on a track to be cut in two by a goods train were rehearsed again, in a chronicle as horrible and familiar as if it had happened yesterday. But years have passed and Thompson and Venables, educated and remorseful, have made what Woolf called 'striking progress'.His decision to open their way to freedom was right and forward-looking. Michael Howard's denunciation of 'unparalleled evil', on hearing that his unlawful, ill-judged 15-year tariff had been so flouted, offered only a timewarped echo of the trial judge's summary of long ago. Even so, Howard may have struck a chord beyond the auxiliary prosecutors of the lynch mob.We are, deep down, happier with the concept of evil than redemption. Wickedness, whether bred-in-the-bone or a contagion affecting the troubled and deprived, is a convenient, catch-all notion that masks any need to excavate the inexplicable. The sinister bond that drives 10-year-old boys to murder is not amenable to rational deconstruction. And so we lump them in with a gallery of the tainted, from Pol Pot to Mary Bell, grateful that we, and our children, are immune to such poison.Redemption is harder to take. When Bell, the killer of two small boys, was tracked down in the wake of Gitta Sereny's biography, few applauded the fact that she, the mother of a teenage daughter, had flourished. Instead, newspaper accounts of her life bore undertones of freakishness. Any suggestion that Bell had a predilection for cat-strangling would have provoked less of a frisson of disgust than her supposed 'gentleness' and wish to work with children.Yet she is the matrix for rehabilitation. A damaged child, Bell was sexually abused by staff and inmates of her special unit before finally emerging to as normal a life as is feasible for anyone pursued by journalists, biographers and all the ghosts of the past. How much better the chances of Thompson and Venables must be. Still there was a rancorous subtext to last week's reports of young men supposedly grown plump on food parcels supplied by caring parents and lavished with the best the state can offer.Heavens, they even have access to television and a pool table before the key turns in the lock at night. What sort of punishment is that? No sort at all, according to Denise Fergus, whose tragedy gives her the unassailable, understandable right to rail against clemency (and, on a minor point, against the newspapers who caricatured her as the weeping victim of last week's ruling. In fact, she endured the ordeal with absolute dignity and composure).But logic, justice and economics decree that Lord Woolf is also right to spare Thompson and Venables 'corrosive' and drug-ridden young offender institutions that would unravel all progress. I would guess that his dig at youth jails was calculated to reverberate far beyond the Bulger case. When I recently discussed prisons with him, he, a notable reformer, described over-crowding as 'the cancer at the heart of the system'.This year, the number of under-17s in jail rose 11 per cent to 2,929. Two months ago, Kevin Henson, aged 17, hanged himself from a pipe in Feltham Young Offenders Institution and became the latest in a litany of similar victims: Zahid Mabarek, battered to death as his parents organised the party for his imminent release; Lee Waite, who committed suicide after a brutal assault by other inmates; Jeffrey Horler, aged 15, who took his life in a Feltham cell 200 miles from his Norfolk home.A dozen teenagers have killed themselves this year in British prisons, crammed with society's Untermenschen: the knife-carriers, the pilferers of car radios and, once Jack Straw's new legislation kicks in, those twice in contravention of community service orders. Only the intervention of Lord Woolf and others prevented the last category being mandatorily siphoned into institutions geared to recycling rather than redeeming young offenders.Who speaks for those children? Most vocally, Sir David Ramsbotham, the Chief Inspector of Prisons, who has twice castigated 'the disgraceful treatment and appalling conditions' at Feltham and lambasted woeful rehabilitation elsewhere. In one prison, he found young men idly crayoning in children's colouring books because there was nothing else to do. Exactly a year has passed since Ramsbotham blotted his own copybook.What he told me during an interview exactly presaged Lord Woolf's conclusion that the Bulger killers should be freed as soon as possible. 'I should not wish them to go to some of the institutions I have seen,' Ramsbotham said. For this, he was forced publicly to apologise by the Home Secretary. It was decided shortly afterwards that his inspectorate would be swallowed up in a new body covering prisons and probation. The suspicion is that Ramsbotham's outspokenness and harrumphing exposures of hideous jail conditions had become too irksome for his political masters to bear.His likely departure is to be deplored, especially in a climate in which many wish the Bulger killers had got their fix of suffering from a penal system admirably equipped to supply it. Such atavistic attitudes imply, under the kindest interpretation, an Augustinian line on salvation. Redeem them, Lord, but not quite yet. Hence the value of Lord Woolf, whose creed of redemption is already well-aired. Two weeks ago, he hinted to me that Myra Hindley might also hope for freedom. Such an outcome would provoke an uproar beside which last week's reprise of resurrected evils would look mild.But the scandal hinges not on those we let out of jail but on those whom we keep in. Of course, we should remember, as they always will, how brutally Thompson and Venables extinguished an innocent life. Other images, less reminiscent of immutable evil, also linger. 'Can I go home now?' one of the boys asked childishly during the trial. The answer, eight years down the line, is yes. Applaud its humanity and reserve the fury for the fate of those in Feltham and elsewhere who will never have their homecoming.