This time of year is governed by the narrative of self-denial, strung together, in a Wagnerian kind of way, by some recurring motifs - the Atkins diet, the four-week detox, nicotine therapy, and a raft of statistics all pointing strongly to the conclusion that human flesh must wither and perish, although the withering may take the form of morbid obesity.  To recap, for people who've been asleep since the fifth series of Friends (when Jennifer Aniston unveiled her new upper arms) - the Atkins diet is the one in which you consume no carbohydrate. This makes you very thin, for reasons related to insulin but otherwise unclear. The four-week detox is the same as the month-on-the-wagon, devised for people who don't want to say they're on the wagon,   because it makes them sound like they're alcoholic for the other 11 months. Nicotine therapy is the ingenious invention of removing all pleasure from the intake of nicotine (just as regular therapy ingeniously removes all pleasure from conversation). The statistics run along the lines of "50% of women and 60% of men in England are clinically overweight", though whether "clinically" means "dangerously", or simply "I was weighed in a clinic, and therefore couldn't take all my clothes off and balance on the heel of one foot", I couldn't decipher.   There is also a good deal of self-denial commentary, which says things like "paradoxically, there have never been more fat people, yet there have never been more people who were on a diet", which facts, far from being paradoxical, are causally   linked, since dieters notoriously end up fatter than they were when they started. The requisite doctor from the University of Good Clean Sense will pipe up with "the best way to lose weight is to eat fewer calories and exercise more". And sure enough, if only for the month of January, the message gets through and great swathes of people cease to do the only things in life they genuinely enjoy - eating, drinking and smoking.   Let's be clear - the people on diets are not the people who are so overweight that they're putting a serious burden on health and transport services. The people who give up drinking are not the ones who go into withdrawal fits. Smokers are a trickier breed, since medics would argue that we're all    killing ourselves all the time, but the real impetus behind giving up smoking cannot be the potential cancer risk 30 years down the line, otherwise we'd all be eating macrobiotically as well, and discontinuing the deployment of clingfilm. This is principally about vanity - the mordant medical gubbins ladled out so liberally is just a smokescreen for what has always been just about the least attractive of all human characteristics. People who obsess about their weight don't want to achieve health, they want to look 18 again. They give up booze and fags for a cut-price facelift. What we're dealing with here is narcissism, and competitiveness, and a grim refusal to accept that ageing necessarily ejects you from the apex of physical beauty, and a thickening torso is not the    cause of that, simply one of its myriad accessories. The coy claim of health as an aim is dishonest, and fuels this depressingly self-involved culture where the world could be on fire, and we'd still be told on a daily basis how many portions of vegetables we need to maintain our own sorry innards, and which exercises most benefit our  gluteus maximi . And yet, when people do diet successfully, or go dry, or give up smoking, what do they say? "I've been really good," as though they're doing all   society an almighty favour, and we should all rejoice in their valiant achievements.   The real puzzle in the weight debate is not why people are getting bigger at all, since the more food predominates as a concern, the more people will eat. Far more pressing concerns are these - when did we cease to accept the march of time, and what do we ever hope to achieve by so doing? Why are fat people thought of as stupid, when the unnaturally thin, with all the time and energy being thin involves, must by definition be more stupid, since they have ordered their lives in such a way as to give absurd priority to their own appearance? Is there anything more joyless than the sight of a gym, with lines of people frantically running nowhere, for the sake of miniscule change to their own dimensions?   What exactly is so laudable about being a non-smoker, given the hoary old truth that smokers pay a lot more in tax than they ever cost in cancer? What's so good about teetotallers? Are they out rescuing kittens while the rest of us are in the pub? Or are they at home, whining about how boring drunk people are?   Even though the old puritanism was pretty bad, by all accounts, the new puritanism is worse - where once self-denial was a side order in the pursuit of higher things, now it's entirely self-serving. Hedonism and indulgence may be unfortunate side effects of relative affluence, but they are better than the alternative of sanctimonious self-preservation. They're better for the soul.