Like Katharine Hamnett and Uefa, the forces of anti-globalisation have decided that now is not quite the time. The movement has cancelled the protests which were to have accompanied the next date of the IMF and World Bank, in Washington. Well, in fact the IMF and World Bank meetings have been cancelled, so there won't be much left for the protesters to protest against. Which leaves the supporters of anti-globalisation musing over just what the correct response to the New York murders should be. So far, little progress seems to have been made. Without absolutely denouncing those responsible for the attacks, Naomi Klein, the movement's figurehead, has written on the nologo site about the "rage and sorrow" she has felt. These emotions do not, however, seem to be shared by everyone posting on the nologo website, which Klein founded and helps fund. After a couple of days, the absence of a formal condemnation had become so glaring that one contributor wrote: "I am shocked to see no response to this action here at nologo.org. The simple fact is that the targets that the terrorist chose represent the ideals that we try and fight - globalisation, Americanisation (economic and military influence)."  A week later, although there is much grappling with how best to proceed, there is not so much any repudiation as a practical awareness that direct action is "off the table" for the time being. The cancelled Washington demonstrations were, according to one of those involved, to have featured "a diversity of tactics", shifting away from the strict non-violence guidelines... and agreeing to respect those who chose to engage in more confrontational or property-destroying tactics, so long as they didn't directly endanger other protesters. You take it that endangering anyone else would have been fine.  And why not? If you believe, like one contributor to the nologo site, that "There are no innocents... the American people like any other population are responsible for the actions of their government," then just about everyone killed last week - except, perhaps, the children and foreign nationals - had it coming to them. It should be pointed out that the site's organisers are editing out offensive comments. From what's left, you can't but get the impression that all in the anti-globalisation movement is not horror and sympathy for the dead civilians. One of them feels it necessary to point out that bankers should not pass entirely unmourned. "Investment bankers don't deserve to burn to death or be buried alive, any more than janitors, or Afghan villagers do... Hate the sin, but love the sinner."  Not all the debaters seem to be persuaded. One writes angrily that his or her post to the site has been erased. "I actually quite agreed with what you said," soothes a site moderator. "What I didn't support was you using this website to make threats against the president of the United States... While I do not support Dubya, I'm not about to threaten his life at this time of war." Another time, eh?