Investors who have had their savings wiped out will doubtless be glad to learn that not everyone involved with Equitable Life has taken a hit. Ernst &amp; Young, Equitable's auditors, may have failed to notice that the insurers were tripping towards disaster, but life for Ernst's partners remains sweet none the less. Finding out how sweet used to be impossible. The structure of the global accountancy firms is designed to minimise accountability. Most are owned by trusts in off-shore havens, where the intensity of commercial secrecy is in inverse proportion to the lightness of the tax burden. As a privately held firm, Ernst &amp; Young was not required to issue information on its finances. Last week a spurned wife succeeded where financial journalists failed. Along with a court in Indiana she forced Robert Bobrow, Ernst's chief executive, to disclose his firm's secrets. Bobrow is a miser, to use a word which all but disappeared from the language when the Anglo-Saxon world began to worship rapacious executives as the sole creators of wealth and the surest guides for politicians to follow. Jan Bobrow said he gave her $5,000 a month (£3,125) to look after their four children. He never told her how much he earned or allowed her to examine their tax returns. 'He would put the tax returns in front of me and say "sign this",' she said. When he told her he wanted to end the 24-year marriage, he offered her $1 million.  Thus provoked, she went through his files and found that she scarcely knew her husband. The court heard that Ernst had somehow persuaded the French information technology company Cap Gemini to pay $11.3 billion for its consulting practice - which the company valued at a mere $4.7bn.  As a partner, Bobrow was entitled to a slice of the sale proceeds. He earned $3.125m in 2001. He had the use of a corporate jet and a corporate apartment in New York. The judge estimated that Bobrow will pocket between $36m and $54m in the next 10 years and then retire on a lavish pension.  Equitable Life's pensioners will not be as fortunate. The new managers at Equitable have a claim lodged in the High Court for £2.6bn damages from Ernst &amp; Young. Their lawyers argue that the auditors could have saved Equitable if they had told the society that it may have to honour its over-generous promise to investors who had signed its 'guaranteed' annuity rate contracts.  Equitable should have realised that the courts could force it to keep its word by ruling that the firm could not unilaterally cut payments. The company might have been sold before its name became a synonym for City incompetence. Alternatively, Equitable might have built up a contingency fund. As it was, Ernst &amp; Young signed off the accounts from 1993, when the payments to annuity holders were reduced, to 1998 without a quibble. In 1999 it made a provision to cover the cost of the courts backing the policy holders who said they had been diddled. According to Equitable's lawyers, the auditors said £50m would sort it out. When the House of Lords ruled against Equitable in 2000, the actual price was a touch higher: £2.6bn. Equitable closed its doors to new business. Bonuses were slashed and policyholders found themselves trapped with sinking pensions.  Ernst &amp;Young deny negligence and we will have to see what happens when the case comes to court. But for one group of patriots it is unthinkable that anyone could question the probity of accountants. This is Britain, dammit, a uniquely fortunate land without dubious or witless auditors. God in his inscrutable wisdom decided not to bless other countries with the rectitude and righteousness of the Surrey stockbroker belt. But we have been blessed, and who but a blasphemer or a madman would want to change the best of all possible worlds? After Enron and its bent accountants at Arthur Andersen collapsed, Patricia Hewitt, a former Andersen   employee, explained that in the bad old days a fallen Britain had auditing scandals aplenty which could more than match the fraud in America. There was Maxwell, Polly Peck, BCCI and many more. 'But action was taken,' she continued. 'Improvements were made to accounting and auditing standards; the regulation of financial services business; the regulatory framework for auditing and accounting standards; and the regulatory framework for auditors and accountants.' Enron couldn't happen here because our accountants followed fundamental 'principles'.  To listen to her you would think that Britain's accountants faced ferocious regulation. There are indeed 23 organisations which set ethical guidelines. None is a statutory, independent regulator with serious powers to protect the public. None prohibits the conflict of interest which allows accountancy firms to use audits as a loss leader to get into the far more lucrative business of selling financial services to companies. The scam has been denounced so often it's tedious to repeat the argument. But as Hewitt and the Treasury don't seem to get it, I'll have to say again that the big four firms in the accountancy cartel have every reason not to warn employees, pensioners and shareholders of fraud or mismanagement because speaking plainly could lead to humiliated executives cancelling contracts for financial services.  According to Equitable's lawyers, Ernst &amp; Young made £7.50 from selling services to Equitable's old management for every £1 they received for audit work. This was pushing it a bit even by Arthur Andersen's standards. Before both were disgraced, Andersen's consultancy work for Enron was worth about twice the price of its audit fees.  Earlier this year with markets crashing, I wrote that the crisis was so great that even this crowd of empty-headed Thatcherites would have to act to restore confidence in company accounts. Six months on, the folly of being fair to New Labour is embarrassingly obvious - and I promise it won't happen again. Hewitt still clings to the notion that British partners in Andersen and the rest are somehow different from American colleagues working for the same firms. In the past week the share price of the cider makers at Bulmer halved after the company admitted that its old auditors hadn't noticed that the costs of 'buy one get one free' deals were being hidden. Amey, a company too inept to make money out of the private finance initiative, was as badly hurt after its new finance director walked out amid rumours of yet more problems with its accounts. Meanwhile, shares in MyTravel were slashed as it admitted its accounts had failed to mention a £50m black hole. The risks of an unreformed City taking the rest of the economy down with it are enormous. But I suspect we are more likely to be protected by the first wives of CEOs than a Labour Government.