The country's probation hostels have hired about 250 cooks and cleaners. With the odd exception, they are low-paid, working-class women who are employed to cope with offenders who could turn dangerous. No one gives women like this much of a thought apart from the Home Office, which in November last year decided it was outrageous that the pampered hussies should continue to enjoy cushy lives in the public sector.  It decided they must sink or swim in the bracing waters of private competition. The contract to run the hostels was duly passed to Morrison's, a part of Anglia Water Group, which subcontracted the work to a consortium that included Pestokill, a specialist in controlling cockroaches rather than criminals.  Harry Fletcher of the National Association of Probation Officers pointed out there was something very odd about the awarding of the contract. Whitehall's own Office for Government Commerce said there had been 'no business case whatsoever' for the privatisation. Benefits and risks weren't identified. In countries where the protection of public money and the probity of government business dealings are taken seriously, there would be an inquiry into why a generous contract was given away without checks.  Not only have poor women workers been moved from security to insecurity but the taxpayer has been fleeced. The cost of paying for the privatised hostels has produced a £400,000 shortfall in the budget of the Greater London Area Probation Service. It will be covered by a reduction in staff. Greater Manchester, West Yorkshire and Merseyside have also reported deficits. Meals for offenders have been cut from three to two a day. In two areas panic alarms connected to local police stations have been disconnected on the grounds that they were too expensive.  One day what's happened to the probation service may generate a scandal. The hostels hold potentially violent men, including sex offenders. With staffing levels and security reduced, there is an obvious risk of an inmate committing a headline-generating crime while he is supposedly under the control of the criminal justice system.  Perhaps nothing will happen and no one will care. The fate of the hostel women will then just be one sad account among many of the consequences of the privatisation mania. Whitehall's distinctive record in its dealings with business is to produce poorer conditions for employees and poorer performance for the public at a greater cost to the Exchequer.  In other words, the seeming impossibility of worse services and higher taxes.