Bribery is so commonplace in American politics that corruption seems as unavoidable as the weather. Everyone who runs for high office must pay for television advertising. Corporations are best placed to supply the required loot. What made Enron exceptional wasn't that it bribed but the vigour with which it bribed. Republican or Democrat, New Labour or Conservative, if a party supported the deregulation of the energy and financial markets, Enron filled its pockets. The corporation's name is now shorthand for the collapse in faith in Anglo-Saxon capitalism - a collapse which is shrinking pensions and wiping out private share portfolios. In  Banking on Death or Investing in Life (Verso, £20), a new account of how the blessing of longer life expectancy has been poisoned by governments' willingness to allow employees' savings to be sequestered and gambled, Robin Blackburn says that a hard question has not received the attention it deserves. Why, he asks, was Enron allowed to collapse? It appeared to be better protected than a Mafia don. Bill Clinton begged Ken Lay, Enron's chairman, for cash - then ordered the American state to act as Enron's agent and harry governments in Britain, India and Africa. George W. Bush was elected President in 2000 with the help of $500,000 from Enron. If a politician legislated for privatisation, there was a fair chance that he would receive an Enron retainer on retirement. Lord Wakeham - who went from Conservative Energy Secretary to Enron board member, while still finding the time to uphold the high standards of the press and rule that the British didn't deserve an elected second chamber - was one among many who twirled through the revolving door. After the company fell apart, Americans discovered that 212 of the 248 members of the US Congress investigating Enron had taken the corporation's shilling.  Arthur Andersen, Enron's crooked auditors, supplied a further protective layer. Andersen, and the remaining members of the 'Big Five' accountancy cartel, became players in Washington's campaign contributions market of the 1990s. They used their hired political muscle to slap down proposals to ban auditors from selling financial services to clients. Andersen also became New Labour's favourite accountant and provided justifications for the privatisation of public services - privatisations from which its clients could expect to benefit.  Many parts of the supposedly free market with far less clout than Enron can count on official protection. No government can allow a major bank to go bust if it threatens to take other parts of the financial system with it. Thus in 1998 Long Term Capital Management - a remarkably short-term, not to say useless, American finance house - was bailed out in a rescue organised by the US Federal Reserve. Yet Enron was allowed to die.  Part of the explanation for the betrayal by all the political escort girls Enron picked up lies in the scale of its $60 billion losses. As important was the realisation that Enron wouldn't destroy banks when it fell. J.P. Morgan and Citibank had organised deals worth billions of dollars. In the past, they wouldn't have relied on the likes of Arthur Andersen to blow the whistle. They would have had their own investigators checking that the loans were secure.  Morgan and Citibank didn't need to worry, however, because they had laid off the risk by passing Enron's debt to pension funds as asset-backed securities. The securities promised a fair rate of return, but left employees' savings dangerously exposed. At Congressional hearings in Washington last week, Senators heard that far from being a stern bank manager, Citibank had collaborated with Enron's dodging of accounting regulations. James F. Reilly, a senior Citigroup loan executive, warned his colleagues in a 1999 email that the paperwork could not reflect the bank's true dealings with Enron as honesty would 'unfavourably alter the accounting'.  If you are concerned about your pension - and you're either lucky or foolish if you're not - what the financial crisis should have taught you is that all the market safeguards have failed. The share options, which directors have used to take fortunes from their stakeholders, were an incentive to fraudulently ramp up share prices. (Lay grabbed $67 million from Enron in its last 12 months.) Auditors weren't to be trusted because they had an interest in keeping clients sweet. Bankers didn't need to fret about their loans if they had passed the risk to pension fund managers. Enron wasn't saved because only employees in pension funds were hit. Contrary to received opinion, their only possible protector is the state.  At least the corrupted US state is trying. Last week gave us the gorgeous spectacle of a Presidency and a Congress which appeared to have been been bought and sold with Enron gold turning on its paymasters. (As the Italians say, you can't buy politicians, only rent them.) Statutory regulation of the accounting industry was strengthened. Auditors were banned from compromising their independence by selling extras to the clients. Researchers for Wall Street firms were offered protection from dismissal if they told the truth about shares their employers were hyping. Senator Phil Gramm, whose wife Wendy went Wakeham-style from deregulating the energy industry in government to a well-padded seat on the Enron board, tried to fight, but there was nothing he could do.  I don't want to over-emphasise the bravery of the American political class. Every public statement from the Bush administration betrays a yearning to return to the gilded age before the bubble inflated - the  status quo ante bubblum, perhaps. Nevertheless, the Americans have been forced to learn from, and react to, chastening experience.  And back in dear, old incorruptible Blighty? Nothing apart from self-serving cries from the accounting industry that Enron couldn't happen here. These would carry more force if Enron Europe's headquarters hadn't been in London. The donations to New Labour and the Tories came from Enron Europe, not the head office in Texas. When Blair thanked Enron, he turned to Enron Europe and gave its chairman, Ralph Hodge, a CBE. Enron Europe certainly looks like a fitting object for investigation by suspicious eyes. It obeyed the orders from Houston and, like its parent, its finances were hidden in a bewildering web of subsidiaries - 179 of them, to be precise.  But when I asked the Serious Fraud Office if its officers were on the case, it said they weren't interested. The Department of Trade and Industry refused to say if it was conducting an inquiry. It would be a minor miracle if it were. What  Private Eye calls the Department of Timidity and Inaction, didn't order independent inquiries into the collapse of Polly Peck and the global criminal conspiracy at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International. Corruption doesn't exist in Britain because the authorities don't look for it.  To date the British response consists of a statement to the Commons last week by the bovine Patricia Hewitt, a former Andersen employee, no less. There would be no immediate action, she said. 'Unnecessary regulation' must be avoided. Auditors may be forced to stop selling consultancy services to clients, but maybe not. Independent regulation of accountancy didn't get a mention. How happy potential criminals must be to have her as Trade and Industry Secretary in a Labour government which is way to the Right of the Bush administration.