Last week the Commons Education Select Committee published an inquiry into how the Government's partnership with business was getting along. Its dissection of Whitehall insouciance as the public purse was emptied by crooks is, as the reviewers say, essential reading for anyone who wants to understand how Britain has combined the worst of the private and state sectors to create a bureaucracy where sloth and irresponsibility flourish. Our true-crime story begins when New Labour came to power with a jargon-ridden commitment to use corporate skills to turn citizens into 'empowered customers' who would invest in 'the Learning Age' and secure 'ownership of knowledge'. In practice, the Commons found, the only empowered customers on view were criminals who took the opportunity to take ownership of taxpayers' money. The Government's instrument for delivering adult education to the 'many not the few' was individual learning accounts. Like so much else, the accounts were a retreat from hard-headed policies. In the early 1990s New Labour had promised to force employers to pay for the training of workers. As the party charged rightwards, such ideas were rejected as 'anti-business'. Instead of making business pay for training, the Government would allow a business, Capita, to organise the education of the masses at public expense.  Everyone over 19 who was prepared to put £50 up-front was entitled to receive £200 from the Government towards the cost of learning any trade from brick-laying to floristry, body massaging to garden design. At least, the Government thought it was paying £200 towards each student's education. The MPs pointed out 'unscrupulous operators' could take the £50 from the student, deliver training worth £100, claim £200 from the state and make a profit of £150. 'There was no check or audit which would have uncovered such systematic abuse of the scheme,' they concluded. Neither Capita nor Whitehall bothered to find out if the students were getting value for money.  A total of 8,910 training companies and colleges were educating students by the time a panicking education department closed the scheme in October last year. The figure has a reassuring precision. But, again, Capita and the Government weren't at all clear if the companies which emptied the accounts were educating students. Once you had registered as a trainer, and almost anyone could, you received a pin number which gave unlimited access to Capita's records. You could trawl the database looking for students whose money hadn't been spent and claim you had trained them and needed paying for your labours. The Education Secretary, Estelle Morris, finally told the Treasury that individual learning accounts had to be stopped after her civil servants heard that copies of Capita's data were on sale   in the information society's equivalent of the back bar of a gangland pub.  Honest educationalists were amazed at the 'pitifully low' security of a system which became 'a licence to print money'. Caroline Lambie, from a company called Hairnet which teaches the over-50s to use computers, told MPs that elementary safeguards weren't in place. 'People who typed in the wrong number three times should have been shut out of the system in the same way they would if they were trying to register with their online banker. People who were registering more than 1,000 students per week per centre should have been shut out because there is no way any training centre could train that many people in a week. There are simple things that databases can do and it does not take an IT expert to understand that.'  I'm sure it doesn't. But understanding that you don't leave a plump wallet in the street if you want to keep your money was beyond Capita and Whitehall. They said they wanted a light regulatory touch so that the public would be free to choose. The language of consumerism was bogus. Just as most people haven't the faintest idea if a private pension is good value, so most students weren't able to judge if a company offering to teach them was reputable. There was no regulation and raiding individual learning accounts became one of the easiest cons to pull.   Mild-mannered MPs said they were 'surprised' that neither Capita nor the Department for Education stopped 'opportunists' posing as teachers and getting their hands on a pot of at least £260 million.(I say 'at least' because as with everything else to do with the disastrous private-public partnership neither Capita nor Morris condescended to tell Parliament how much money was wasted.)  New Labour's claims to be empowering consumers were cant for a second reason. Demand for courses didn't come from a public anxious to retrain and reskill in the approved Third Way manner but from colleges and private training companies which persuaded one and all to sign up. By the time the plug was pulled, there were 2.5m accounts listed on Capita's computer system. As Britain is an undereducated country, it sounds an impressive achievement. But, the MPs said that until the dying months of the project Capita couldn't prevent crooks creating accounts for students 'they had not trained, or who did not even exist'.  There may have been tens of thousands of phantoms. Investigators from York Consulting talked to 1,500 people who, according to Capita, had spent the money in their accounts on training. Twenty-seven per cent said they hadn't spent a penny and had yet to receive training. Capita said that there was probably a glitch in   the computer system. The MPs suggested another interpretation. 'By the summer of 2001 around one in four of those entered into the database as having completed training had had their discounts stolen by an unscrupulous provider before any training could take place.'  The police are trying to catch up. Eighty companies which profited from the bonanza are under investigation. Detectives have found links between the superficially dull world of adult education and the most exotic crimes. Special Branch and the Anti-Terrorist Squad are investigating whether Islamic fundamentalists raided learning accounts to raise funds for al-Qaeda. A group of animal rights activists is facing charges that it attempted to steal £100,000 from individual learning accounts. Given the ease with which frauds could roam the system looking for accounts to rob, the true scale of the thieving will never be known. But a senior police officer made an attempt to quantify how much money disappeared when he told the  Times that one suspect may have pocketed £2.5m. (That's right, one suspect.) Taxpayers aren't the only victims. The British education system leaves about a quarter of the population with 'literacy or numeracy difficulties'. In other words, their schooling has been so abysmal they can't write or count. The collapse of individual learning accounts robbed them of a chance to remedy the defects and also left bona fide colleges and businesses in debt and in the lurch.  Yet while Whitehall resists their claims for compensation, the select committee reports that Morris is 'continuing to cooperate' with Capita. She isn't demanding the return of the £55m the company received. Rather she is planning to give Capita a new contract to run   the next attempt to train the masses. No one has been sacked or reprimanded. Her indulgence requires an explanation.  Privatisation and national government has turned Capita from a company worth £330,000 in 1987 to a £2.6 billion conglomerate. Its record is often lamentable.  Private Eye has run so many stories on its inadequacies - trying and failing to deliver housing benefit to the south London poor, trying and failing to computerise criminal records - its editor could issue a Capita Christmas annual. Ministers keep awarding it contracts in part because there aren't many other companies who can compete for the work. The new world of contracted-out services and public works built under the private finance initiative isn't a market in the traditional sense. After Andersen Consulting had made a fantastically expensive hash of delivering a new National Insurance Computer, New Labour's Dawn Primarolo explained that she wouldn't demand the return of public money 'for fear of jeopardising future relationships' with a company the Government needed on side if the privatisation drive was to continue.  That is the rational explanation at any rate. But it's unwise to ignore the element of dementia in the Government's dealings with corporations. For the political class, business is the answer for every administrative problem. They are in the grip of an ideology which allows them to see no faults in their beloved. When schools fail, hit squads are sent in. When parents fail, they are threatened with fines. When Capita fails, it is given more public money.  If you are going to work tomorrow, comfort yourself with the thought that you are paying taxes to keep its share price high.