During their stay at the Maroma Hotel, a pricey retreat on Mexico's Caribbean coast, Cherie Booth/Blair took her husband by the hand and led him along the beach to a 'Temazcal', a steam bath enclosed in a brick pyramid. It was dusk and they had stripped down to their swimming costumes. Inside, they met Nancy Aguilar, a new-age therapist. She told them that the pyramid was a womb in which they would be reborn. The Blairs became one with 'Mother Earth'. They saw the shapes of phantom animals in the steam and experienced 'inner-feelings and visions'. As they smeared each other with melon, papaya and mud from the jungle, they confronted their fears and screamed. The joyous agonies of 'rebirth' were upon them. The ceremony over, the Prime Minister and First Lady waded into the sea and cleaned themselves up as best they could. When the unnerving story broke, those who could rid their minds of the image of vacuous self-indulgence might have wondered how an authoritarian right-winger could be comfortable with therapies which are meant to be liberating.  I can't trace the origins of all Aguilar's quackeries, but am reasonably certain that the screaming Blairs were unwittingly following the prescriptions of one Arthur Janov. He invented 'primal therapy' in 1970, the moment when many baby boomers decided the personal was political. If enough people changed themselves, the reasoning went, the world would change with them and there would be no need to fight the riot squad. Janov told his patients to destroy their fears with primal screams 'so that you can be free in the present and free to build your future'. Psychic rebirth came from Wilhelm Reich, Sigmund Freud's treacherous disciple. It was the unique selling point of the Esalen Institute in California in the 1960s. You were reborn when you released yourself from the grief and rage that society has created by distorting the true, independent you. There were dozens of competing varieties created at the time. The most popular was Werner Erhard's 'est' courses, on which you were freed 'to be whatever you want to be' by instructors who beat you up.  Reichians blamed society for repressing good emotions. Freudians said that a civilised lite was needed to control the dark and irrational masses. But the similarities between the rivals were more striking. The treatments both offered were pseudo-science as medicine but a great help to government and business, as Adam Curtis shows in The Century of the Self , a resounding justification for the licence fee, which continues on BBC2 tonight.  The branding of products is not as modern as the business schools pretend. Edward Bernays, Freud's nephew, used psychoanalytic techniques to show cor  porations how they could keep the plebs happy by associating their goods with unconscious desires. In 1928 he wrote in his honestly titled  Propaganda, that 'those who manipulate this unseen mechanism of society constitute an invisible government which is the true ruling power of our country'. Bernays advised presidents to become objects of desire by being seen with film stars. He orchestrated the PR for the American overthrow of Guatemala's elected government in 1954 - the start of a war that produced tens of thousands of corpses.  The young who rejected the protestant work-ethic in the 1960s threatened Bernays's controlled, consumer society. Life insurance companies, for example, found that graduates who were reinventing themselves to get the most out of the present had little interest in buying cover for the future. If, however, companies could 'conform to the new non-conformity' there were corporate therapists who could persuade rebels that consuming allowed them to be whatever they wanted to be. Music and clothes could be presented as an expression of individuality easily enough. So could a life insurance plan if you had the right spin.  Curtis has found a jaundiced 1960s revolutionary, Stew Albert, who watched his contemporaries settle for 'socialism in one person'. The idea that 'you can buy anything', he said, 'replaced the notion that you were perfectly free to create anything or that you were perfectly free to change the world'.  In the 1970s Christine McNulty of the Stanford Research Institute looked at how the new consumers would vote. Stanford divided people by their attitudes and 'lifestyles' rather than their class. Regardless of their backgrounds, those who believed they were free from the chains of society were far more likely to vote for Thatcher and Reagan than any other group. Her colleagues thought she was mad. These were socially aware and socially concerned people who may well have marched against the Vietnam war. But the appeal of 'choice', and getting 'government off the backs of the people' was far greater than nostalgia for a vanishing youth. They had been taught that selfishness was the way to liberate the abused self. The surprise, in retrospect, was that anyone was surprised by their conservatism.  The pattern established by Bernays repeated itself. Focus groups created by psychoanalysts for business took over politics. I don't want to pretend that Thatcher and Reagan were innocent in this debasement of public life, their aides knew all the modern tricks. But the use of psychiatry to persuade the public that politicians were servants who gave them what they wanted was taken to its extreme by Blair and his mentor Bill Clinton.  When he was running for re-election in 1996, Clinton was happy to do what no Republican president had dared do and slash welfare. He then ordered a 'neuro-poll' of suburban voters to ensure he had their approval. They weren't asked about their irrelevant political views. Clinton wanted to know their inner feelings: whether they were spontaneous or organised; what they would do on a romantic weekend.  He offered the electorate micro-policies to calm their barely expressed fears. Vaguely worried parents, to quote the most notorious example, were promised 'V-chips' in televisions to stop children watching porn, rather than proper funding for state education. Robert Reich, Clinton's Labour Secretary, asked: 'What's the point in getting elected when you have no mandate to do anything?' To which Dick Morris, Clinton's pollster, replied: 'Politics needs to be as responsive to the needs and whims of the marketplace as business is, and needs to be as sensitive to the bottom line.' (Morris knew about the market-place. He resigned from Clinton's staff after being caught sucking the toes of a $200-an-hour Washington whore.)  Derek Draper, Peter Mandelson's former aide, confirmed that New Labour was as bad. He saw its leaders lost in therapy as they followed the free-associations and subliminal identifications of focus groups. Blair would 'pore over' the reports. 'A bunch of eight people drinking wine determined pretty much everything Labour did.'  It sounds pitiful, but Philip Gould, Blair's focus-group organiser, has convinced himself that therapeutic marketing has produced a nobler system of government. The arrogance of politicians who knew what was best has gone, he maintained. Voters were 'consumers'; their focus groups 'created a new form of politics'. The fight against this sinister folly is the best reason for democrats to get out of bed in the morning.  In politics, psychoanalytic techniques are no more than manipulative attempts to divert public attention while business carries on as usual. Blair made a - Freudian? - slip when he blurted out that his 'tough' stance on crime was a 'load of nonsense'. Gould describes in his autobiography how he exploded when the market researchers he usually reveres told him the public would accept higher taxes. Curtis's film has bitter moments as former friends look back on the time they wasted supporting new ways of defending the powerful. A contemptuous Draper says that focus-group politics 'suits big business, suits entrenched interests and suits the status quo'. If business is better at pandering to primitive yearnings than government, asked Reich, why shouldn't it replace government - a question he may regret raising.  In British constituencies and American states where the winner takes all, the only people who are worth probing are swing voters in marginal seats. This is scarcely popular sovereignty, but the best answer to Gould's hijacking of democracy is the one that should hurt him most. Purists insist democracy is based on the assumption that some voters are rational for some of the time. As the turnout at the last election showed, millions broadly agree. Bored and disgusted with the politicians who say they only wish to pander to their emotions, they, rationally, walked away.