For optimists who retained the illusion that New Labour is a benign political force, Tony Blair's alliance with Silvio Berlusconi should provide an overdue education. If they can force themselves to see clearly - a huge 'if', I grant you - they will gawp as every good thing they thought they knew about their leader melts before their eyes. Blair and, I regret to say, Gordon Brown are now at one with the heirs of Mussolini. Berlusconi's coalition includes the MSI, the direct descendent of Il Duce's fascist party. You can barely utter the word 'fascism' before diplomats and conventional academics start screaming that the MSI is really 'post-fascist'; a kinder and gentler version of the murderous past. Its leaders prefer Armani to black leather, doubters are instructed, and require you to drink  latte rather than castor oil. For all the temporising, the MSI's electoral success is built on the incitement of racial hatred and the provision of a home for undiluted fascists who show no signs of wanting to settle down in the post-modern world.  There is a large element of nostalgia for the Thirties behind the MSI. The Northern League, Berlusconi's other coalition partner, has a demented yearning to recreate Padania, a medieval Lombard state which never existed. Berlusconi is more frightening because he represents a possible future.  He is the first plutocratic populist to take over a democratic country. Quite where the opposition will present the argument for removing him from power at the next election is a delicate question. Berlusconi owns Italy's largest private television network, Mediaset, and his appointees are taking over the state-owned Rai. He will soon control 90 per cent of Italian TV.   Meanwhile, his control of government has enabled him to stop in their tracks investigations into charges of attempting to bribe the police and magistrates, tax fraud and breaches of monopoly law. States and corporations are intertwining across the world. Berlusconi is a trail-blazer who shows his colleagues how profitable the merger can be.  On a visit to Italy in February and at the European Union summit in Barcelona yesterday, Blair cemented a coalition with the monopoly capitalist against the trade unionists who had, somewhat foolishly, helped him to power. The Foreign Office pretends that all Britain is doing is asking hidebound Europe to emulate our flexible labour market. Its soothing argument ignores the active malice of New Labour policy.  Blair and Berlusconi agreed in February that the EU should not give workers more rights. Left-wing Italians were astonished. Not once during his visit did he hint that he disagreed with a word Berlusconi said. The PM's behaviour was 'incredible, a political act of the gravest sort', said Pietro Folena, a Left Democrat MP, who went on to recommend that socialists in the European Parliament should consider expelling the Labour Party from their ranks. Cesare Salvi, the socialist vice-president of the Italian Senate, concluded that Blair 'was now the leader of the European Right'.  Signore Salvi was spot on. In any European election, New Labour, whose giddy intellectuals once announced that Britain was building a Third-Way Europe, must hope that the Right wins. By the Right I don't mean Christian Democrats or Gaullists who believe in social solidarity, but radical right-wingers who will on occasion combine nostalgia for fascism, enthusiasm for unconstrained capitalism and racism in equal measure.  The concordat - or should that be 'axis'? - between Labour London and post-fascist Rome pushed John Monks, the painfully moderate General Secretary of the TUC, to denounce Blair as 'bloody stupid' last week. He is indeed stupid, but restless with it. The TUC knows Blair wants to stop Europe extending employment law to protect temporary workers. It has been told he won't allow employees' representatives to restrict the downsizing effects of corporate restructuring. It fears he will destroy existing rights.  There is an abundance of evidence to support its suspicions. Patricia Hewitt, the Trade and Industry Secretary who learned the ways of the private sector at Arthur Andersen, is proposing to cut the number of industrial tribunal cases by about 40,000 a year. She will compel litigants to pay the costs of the victor. Most sacked workers can't risk losing thousands and therefore won't sue. Labour peers tell me that the measure was all but drafted by the Confederation of British Industry and Blair won't allow the most modest of amendments to be considered. Judge John Prophet, a member of a judiciary which is not known for its devotion to the workers' cause, said the Government would 'humiliate employees who are simply seeking to have their rights established'.  The current issue of Tribune carries a piece fuelled with disillusion and disgust by Jon Cruddas, a former adviser to Blair. It deserved more attention than it received. Cruddas explains the apparent hatred of employees by revealing that Downing Street is the last place on the planet where you can still find believers in the 'New Economy'. Blair and Brown think the 'working-class is withering away', he writes. Britain's real prosperity is being built by world-wide-web wizards, who network in coffee bars, enjoy hectic portfolio careers and earn fortunes by manipulating symbols - and each other.  Protecting the rights of employees can only harm them and the economy. Workers don't need secure jobs. They must be freed from the shackles of protection and encouraged to join the expanding ranks of the dynamic self-employed.  If New Labour understood modernity, it would be hard to disagree with its leaders, even if you regretted the passing of the old world. But there is no evidence that the British are bouncing from job to job - the length of time staff spend with an employer hasn't changed in 20 years. The numbers of the self-employed aren't rising. The fastest growing areas of employment are indeed in the service sector. However, the mass of service workers aren't web designers but clerks, nurses, cleaners, care assistants and call-centre drones. What wealth Britain has does not come from improvements in productivity and hipsters exploiting technological advances, but from a weary workforce which must put up with the longest hours in Europe.  Monks said Blair will find it 'very difficult to sell the euro' to trade unionists if he didn't stop undermining European social democracy and the employment rights that went with it. The General Secretary had a point. Why should we vote for an Italianised Europe where accusations of corruption aren't investigated, cronies run state TV and workers are condemned to drudgery and insecurity? We can get all of that at home.   <B>Who needs enemies when Gavyn is on your side?</B><BR><BR>Gavyn Davies is white. Human mortality being what it is, he has slumped into middle age. Nevertheless, when the chairman of the BBC Governors presented himself as the hero of Asian yoof and the wickedest dude ever on the street, he wasn't quite the hypocrite he appeared.  In one particular, Davies isn't a member of the 'south ern, white, middle classes' he denounced for criticising the BBC. By any reasonable measure, he is upper-class, one of the princes of the new aristocracy of wealth.  Estimates of the size of his fortune vary between £100 and £170 million. (Once you're in nine figures, who's counting?) He isn't a meritocrat who earned his money. Davies was one of the part ners at Goldman Sachs who received huge rewards when the private bank was sold. As with building societies, the flotation of Goldman Sachs was a liquidation of assets previous generations of partners had entrusted to Davies and colleagues, and a denial of their enjoyment to the future.  Gordon Brown is his friend. His conservative    enemies claimed that his appointment to the BBC chairmanship was yet another sign of cronyism in public life. Yet like everyone else in positions of power, Davies says he's an enemy of the lite. In his suggestive study,  The New Elites , George Walden explains the humbug as a dodge to deflect criticism. The snobs condescend to   slum it with the mob and pretend to be on its side.  What Walden's sensible cynicism can't explain is the vehemence with which our grandees throw charges of litism, and their genuine psychological wounds.  My guess is they were inflicted in the transition from the old to the new establishment. For all its crimes, at least a part of the   ruling class once had standards other than making money. Its successors have nothing else. Davies can't understand how the BBC can be condemned for failing to deliver a public service when its audience is shooting up. Standards other than crude success are beyond him. All he can do is howl with uncomprehending pain.