Stock market bubbles used to have predictable consequences. When the hysterical market crashed, retribution and regulation followed as pumped and dumped shares were revealed to be worthless pieces of paper from catch-penny crooks. The South Sea Bubble of 1720 was Britain's first capitalist mania. 'Through the contrivance and cunning of stock jobbers,' said Jonathan Swift as he looked at a London which believed shares would rise forever, 'there hath been brought in such a complication of knavery and cozenage, such a mystery of iniquity, and such an unintelligible jargon of terms to involve it in, as were never known in any other age or country in the world.'  When the crash came and tens of thousands were ruined, Parliament demanded vengeance. The Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Aislabie, was imprisoned in the Tower, a tradition Londoners could be forgiven for reviving when they understand what Gordon Brown has done to the Underground.  The Victorian author Charles Mackay, recreated the scene in his  Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, which is a far more reliable guide to the herd-like behaviour of markets than the  Wall Street Journal . 'Mr Aislabie found few friends: his guilt was so apparent and so heinous that nobody had courage to stand up in his favour. It was finally resolved, without a dissentient voice, that Mr Aislabie had encouraged and promoted the destructive execution of the South-Sea scheme with a view to his own exorbitant profit, and had combined with the directors in their pernicious practices, to the ruin of the public trade and credit of the kingdom: that he should for his offences be ignominiously expelled from the House of Commons, and committed a close prisoner to the Tower of London... This verdict caused the greatest joy.'  Wall Street in the 1920s and 1990s lied to others and often to itself. Share values which bore no relation to the real worth of companies were justified with the chant that old standards of judging investments no longer applied. The Wall Street Crash exposed the believers in the New Economy in 1929 and led to ferocious regulation of the American banking system. But the bursting of the internet bubble and the unmasking of the criminal conspiracy at Enron has failed to produce reform. Unlike the Parliamentarians of Georgian London or Roosevelt's officials in the Washington of the 1930s, our political class can't learn from experience.  The vested interest which all but cries to high heaven to be curbed is the private accountancy monopoly. Last week justifiable doubts about the accuracy of auditors were undermining companies and threatening to keep America in recession. Investors suspected that, as with cowboy plumbers, the larger the auditor's fees, the shabbier the work. There was a shareholders revolt at the annual general meeting of Airtours which will, I'm sure, be the first of many. Institutional investors raised the killer question. How, they asked, could Arthur Andersen (that firm again) give a straight account of the company's finances when income from its consulting services to Airtours was seven times greater than its audit fee?  Auditors are meant to act in the interest of shareholders, and the law gives them greater investigatory powers than the police. But if they are allowed to receive vast fees for other services to companies, they are not going to upset their paymasters when they produce audits. Prem Sikka, professor of accountancy at Essex University, has a challenge for anyone who believes the status quo is honest: 'I ask accountants to name me one financial scandal which has been brought to public attention by auditors blowing the whistle. They never can because it has never happened.'  No one would allow the owners of cheap hotels to appoint fire inspectors. Local authorities are banned from appointing their auditors or buying extra services from them. There's no reason why the same rules shouldn't apply to the private sector. The Economist, which is hardly a journal of radical opinion, was so worried by the Enron effect it suggested that auditing should be nationalised. Ministers could protect creditors and employees, and indeed the economy as a whole, by passing responsibility for scrutinising the books from private accounting companies to a Government agency: the Inland Revenue, for instance, or Customs and Excise.  The conflicts of interest in auditing have been notorious for decades. The sole advantage of the misery caused by stock-market crashes is meant to be that abuses which have been tolerated for years are remedied. There's no sign of abusive accounting being tackled at the moment, in part because of the ferocious clout of the big five firms.  In Washington, they fund senators and have used their hired help to fight off regulation. New Labour's friendship with Arthur Andersen has received overdue attention in the past few weeks, but the party is nothing if not generous in its favours.  Last year, The Observer and the Campaign for Freedom of Information forced the Government to reveal the identities of the private-sector staff it allows to draw up public policy. The Department of Trade and Industry, now run by the former Andersen employee Patricia Hewitt, had 112 secondees. The Treasury employed the 'free' services of accountants from PricewaterhouseCoopers, Ernst &amp; Young and Pannell Kerr Forster. All three firms went on to win lucrative consultancy contracts from the department. Last week PricewaterhouseCoopers produced a report which claimed that Brown's part-privatisation of the Underground would not fleece the taxpayer. If you believe that, I have some Enron shares you may want to buy.  Speaking of which, as Enron finally caught up with the Government we heard Labour MPs saying their masters weren't quite as creepy as the Conservatives because Ministers didn't do favours for companies and then take seats on their boards.  This is strictly true, for the time being at least, but not the full story. As I have mentioned before, the greatest gift New Labour gave accountants was to drop its plans to regulate the profession. Ian McCartney, the relevant Trade and Industry Minister and a good man in bad company, was all for controlling the big five, but was overruled by Peter Mandelson. After his second resignation, Mandelson received speaking fees from Ernst &amp; Young of £2,000 an appearance.  Write like this and this credulous Government accuses you of being anti-business. But as institutional investors and the Economist confirm, real businesses want auditing cleaned up. I suppose it had to happen sooner or later: New Labour now finds itself well to the Right of the City.   <b>Giant pander Blair keeps mum for Bush</B>On 22 January, Lee Raymond the chairman of Esso/Exxon was welcomed to Downing Street, and proved to those who doubted it that Tony Blair has no enemies on the Right.  The most paranoid anti-corporate protester couldn't invent a better villain than Raymond. His generosity to politicians has been spectacular: Exxon spent $6 in Washington in the last five   years for every one spent by Enron. The bungs helped persuade the Bush administration to abandon the Kyoto treaty on global warming, a blight which Raymond has variously claimed doesn't exist or isn't understood.  He has cited in his support a petition questioning whether the planet was baking which was signed by an impressive '17,000 scien tists'. Close inspection of the list revealed that it included the forged signatures of the Spice Girls .  The rumour in Whitehall was that Raymond told the Prime Minister to be a good boy and keep criticisms of Bush's energy policy to himself. On Wednesday, Bush announced that America, which belches out a quarter of the world's greenhouse gases, would rely on indus try to come up with solutions and 'avoid imposing any regulations'.  The policy could have been written by Exxon. In fact, it probably was. Rene Dahan, the corporation's executive vice-president, told the  Financial Times last year that the Bush plan 'will not be very different from what you are hearing from us'.  There wasn't a squeak of   protest from Britain. But then Blair never contradicts America. After 11 September, he gave America British troops and made his country a target so he could shepherd Washington away from its anarchic unilateralism. The failure of his foreign policy was total. Blair got nothing in return; no Kyoto, no controls on biological and nuclear weapons, no just settlement in Palestine.   After Bush's ravings about the 'axis of evil', even Chris Patten said it was time for Europe to oppose an 'absolutist and simplistic' administration. But Tony Blair cannot. He carries on standing shoulder to shoulder, or lips to posterior, and pretends he influences a superpower which thinks he's a useful dupe when, that is, it thinks of him at all.