Why,' asked Neil Kinnock in the best speech of his career, 'am I the first Kinnock in a thousand generations to be able to get to university? Why is Glenys the first woman in her family in a thousand generations to be able to get to university? Was it because our predecessors were thick? Does anybody really think that they didn't get what we had because they didn't have the talent or the strength or the endurance or the commitment? Of course not. It was because there was no platform upon which they could stand.' The platform for the baby boomers on which the Kinnocks climbed was built by their parents. They had fought a world war and rebuilt a shattered country, but were willing to make sacrifices to give the young a better life. Their children enjoyed the full employment of the Keynesian golden age and a welfare state free at the point of delivery. If we confine ourselves to the actual and aspiring middle classes, we should note in A-level week of all weeks that they also received a free university education.  To demographers the baby boom or bulge - and how well that word captures the boomers in late middle-age - ran from 1946 to 1964. Social historians would do better to take a look at those born between 1942 and 1956 if they wish to capture the core of the luckiest generation of the twentieth century.  Most middle-class boomers prospered under Margaret Thatcher; only those working as managers in parts of manufacturing or the public sector experienced the misery of the rest of the country. Although many protested at the time, their complaints lacked force because Thatcherism's economic individualism and suspicion of independent institutions were authentic representations of the spirit of the Sixties, however loudly Conservatives now denounce the devil's decade.  In 1997, the progressive wing of the baby-boomer bourgeoisie took over. New Labour Ministers were at last given the chance to show their gratitude for the free milk and generous grants. The tasks facing them were small in comparison to those of their parents. They had to renew Britain's decayed infrastructure and educate the young. Their response will be the epitaph of a pampered generation gone sour: Let the children pay. Let the children suffer. Better that than endure the smallest privation ourselves.  The justifications for the abolition of student grants and imposition of tuition fees are superficially attractive. Working-class children did not in general go to university. The middle and upper classes did and were prepared for better jobs and higher salaries. New Labour has stopped them enjoying a free ride at the expense of working-class taxpayers. David Blunkett boasts that tuition fees were the one 'socialist' measure of the 1997 administration, to the astonishment of listeners who thought he'd forgotten how to spell 'socialist', let alone retained the courage to blurt it out in a public place where anyone might hear him.  During its fleeting rediscovery of egalitarianism, however, New Labour went to great lengths to avoid stating plainly that a degree is not what it was. In the Sixties 5 per cent of 18-year-olds went to university. The Government wants 50 per cent of school leavers to be in higher education by 2010. Pretty much everyone in power has Gradgrind's view of education as a commodity to be traded in the market place. They are reluctant to explain to the young that the currency has been debased.  A brief look at this week's desperate advertisements from universities reveals the depreciation. There are courses in catering, stage management, hotel management, tourism, and sports journalism: trades which 20 years ago did not require a degree, or even a pass at English O level.  It may well be that the explosion of lower-middle class degree courses will give us Continental levels of professionalism. But no one should have the nerve to deny that employers have followed the Government's lead and dumped the cost of the training on to students.  The quality of that training is collapsing and students are being sold short. There has been no great increase in investment in higher education to compensate the first generation to pay up-front. There are whispers that the fees and enormous debts will never be worthwhile for those who buy obscure courses at obscure universities. They will be stuck in educational negative equity for the rest of their lives.  Those same fees and debts require all but the richest to work their way through college, and vice-chancellors have to put a lot of effort into maintaining the pretence that academic standards are not suffering as a result. (What, incidentally, are students going to do when recession comes and the demand for burger-flippers flops?) And, notoriously, the prospect of debt discourages the working class from going into higher education.  The answer to class discrimination being knocked about in enlightened New Labour circles is a graduate tax. Today's young will not pay a penny until they achieve the high-earning careers they have been promised. A graduate tax would undoubtedly be fairer. But if we're talking socialism here, surely it should be applied with greater severity on baby-boomer graduates whose degrees had a lucrative scarcity value when they were awarded and who got away with enjoying the fruits of working class taxes gratis for decades. Gordon Brown was born in 1951; Tony Blair in 1953. They are more likely to leave their wives for a gay wedding at Gretna Green than to tax their privileged contemporaries - and themselves.  The young at least have an idea of what enrolling in college will cost. Brown is fortunate that they haven't understood the Treasury's outrageous Private Finance Initiative and Private-Public Partnerships.  I'm sorry to repeat myself but even journalists and trade union leaders (what do I mean, 'even'?) just aren't getting it. Instead of paying for public works, such as new roads or new hospitals, from Treasury reserves or by government borrowing, Brown is allowing private consortia to borrow the money at rates far higher than the Government can secure. They then take enormous windfall profits and charge the public an inflated rent for 30 or 60 years. However shabby the service, the next generation will not be able to get rid of the corporations because Brown has agreed that the taxpayers will meet their debts if they lose the contracts and go bust.  Brown is mortgaging the future on the worst possible terms. Today's school leavers will be paying for his profligacy until 2029 and, in some cases, until 2059. They're in a kind of bond slavery.  The PFI, I think, represents the boomer ethos at its purest. For all the nostalgia about Sixties liberation, its children, in their New Labour manifestation, have turned out greedy, selfish, charmless, narcissistic, po-faced, bullying, self-pitying and - as each year takes it toll - plug ugly. Their parents forsook instant gratification in order to give their children a better life. The boomers are determined that their children should be as selfless.   If the Government wants the young to meet its debts you would hope that it would have the courtesy to treat them with respect. But this regime is incapable of honest dealing, as the case of the Hassockfield prison for kiddies shows.  Last week its Youth Justice Board was presented with a PR problem. A report from the Social Services Inspectorate arrived describing riotous conditions at the prison in County Durham.  Like the other kiddie jails, Hassockfield was the creation of the rush into gesture politics after the murder of James Bulger. Locking up children as young as 12 appealed to politicians in both parties - it made them sound like big, hard men when they went on the television. Michael Howard ordered the first and New Labour carried on his building programme with vigour.  Unfortunately, as Harry Fletcher from the probation officers' union, Napo, points out, if you put the most disturbed and abused children in the country together, chaos follows. Most inmates come from council care; many commit more crimes within weeks of release. Their 'peer pressure' on each other is precisely what you would expect.  The inspectors found that children at the private prison were throwing missiles, spitting, swearing and generally smashing up the joint. Their 'wanton' behaviour 'went unchecked'. Demoralised staff had abandoned the project.  August is a quiet month for news and you might have hoped to have heard about the consequences of Ministerial posturing.  You didn't, because the Youth Justice Board didn't issue a press release until late on Wednesday afternoon, right on the deadline for the next day's papers and that evening's news broadcasters. The release slyly avoided mentioning any of the inspectorate's descriptions of the tumult and gave the general impression that the private warders were doing a splendid job.  The full report wasn't available until late at night and only a diligent Times picked it up. After the election a chastened Blair swore that the days of spin and manipulation were over. He must have forgotten to pass his ruling to the Home Office.