Napoleonic agonies haunt our leaders. They may be prepared to trim before every wind or strike any pose which will earn them 15 column inches of fame in the tabloids. But late at night, when the last report from the focus groups has been read and the last courtier has made his final bow and backed out of the door, they worry if posterity will hail them as Great Men. Bill Clinton's friends tell us that he wonders about history's verdict on his Presidency. ('Bill Who?' if he's lucky.) The remaining New Labour idealists are starting to ask if their team has the nerve to seize the moment and call a referendum on the momentous question of joining the single currency. 'Is the Prime Minister gutsy enough to settle this once and for all?' mutters the liberal press. 'We know he's cautious, but is he a coward?'  European Monetary Union gets the thumbs down from the polls and our foreign-owned press, both of which New Labour takes a great deal of notice. There are also signs that Gordon Brown is asking if it is wise to take an over-valued pound into a currency run by an unelected central bank whose board is unchecked by a central government and is required to drive inflation ever-lower - without bothering for a moment about unemployment and the consequences for exporters.  With these forces ranged against him, the Prime Minister would have to show exceptional courage to risk all on a referendum. He may surprise me and be a big, brave boy, but his contemptible deference to George W. Bush last week suggests gutlessness.  Europe fills the papers even though it bores the readers because it is the one great subject which divides the powerful. By contrast, the political class has been united on nuclear weapons policy throughout my life. Support for nuclear deterrence was the first step towards respectability; it was so obviously politically correct it barely needed to be discussed. Labour was 'credible' and fit for government only when the party announced it had abandoned the yearning for unilateral gestures in the conference chambers of the world and accepted the nuclear consensus.   Let us be generous and grant that New Labour's conversion was genuine and the political class's belief in multilateralism was sincere. There were honourable grounds for assuming that the fall of the Berlin Wall cleared the way for international treaties to limit the threat of nuclear war.  Bush is unilaterally destroying the basics of British conventional wisdom. Labour and the Tories are taking the assault on their beliefs without protest. They are also happy for the Americans to use her bases at Menwith Hill and Fylingdales in Yorkshire as part of their anti-ballistic missile defence system. Star Wars can't defend Britain. An establishment which affected to be patriotic when it opposed CND in the 1980s is therefore exposing the country to unprotected attack from the enemies of America.  The Conservatives have been the most abject. I remember them railing for years against anyone who questioned nuclear deterrence or multilateralism. Now they support Star Wars, which will allow America to launch nuclear attacks undeterred by the fear of reprisal, and applaud while the US proposes abrogating multilateral arms-control treaties.  Iain Duncan Smith may be all but unknown here, but the Conservative leadership candidate is popular as a useful idiot at Washington conferences organised by the American Enterprise Institute and other right-wing think-tanks. He stands alongside Richard Perle, Conrad Black and Benjamin Netanyahu and proclaims that the US should be free to do whatever it wants. (Lord Tebbit praised Duncan Smith as 'normal' last week as he compared him unfavourably with the exotic Portillo. If such gruesome company is 'normal', what's His Lordship's definition of peculiar?)  Blair won the election with the claim that the Tory Party of Duncan Smith had lurched to the Right. If it has, he's lurched with it. Given his acceptance of multilateralism, Blair could have made an entirely conventional argument against destroying the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and refused to permit Britain to be treated as a colonial territory by the Pentagon. Instead, he told Bush that Britain shared 'the American concerns that there are highly unstable states who are developing nuclear capabilities. We have got to look at all the different ways, including defence systems, that we can to deal with that threat'.  As so often, it's hard to know where to begin with the PM. Let's start by looking at the likely 'threat'. If Iraq, North Korea or whoever was mad enough to risk nuclear annihilation by attacking America, it wouldn't build inter-continental ballistic missiles which could be shot down by Star Wars, but smuggle a bomb into Washington in a lorry and explode it, probably without claiming responsibility.  If alleged rogue states need to be controlled, they can only be controlled by international agreement between regional powers, as Iraq was before American arrogance alienated Russia, China and much of the Middle East. Bush is destroying international agreements and pushing potential rivals who fear American military dominance of the planet through the militarisation of space into a new and unnecessary nuclear race. Smaller countries - 'rogue' or otherwise - are more than likely to opt for the cut-price alternative to going nuclear: chemical and biological weapons.  In private, most in Whitehall accept that Bush's dreams are folly. But they cheer themselves up by saying that Star Wars will never work and point to the billions of dollars wasted on systems which can't shoot down missiles in any trial resembling wartime conditions.  US military incompetence is a false comfort. The rest of the world will base its response to Star Wars on what it expects will happen. The fact that Bush can't say what system he will deploy because he doesn't know how the technology can be made to work paradoxically leads other powers to prepare for the worst.  The shambolic missile defence experiments have a further sinister consequence. They encourage those in Washington who advocate using nuclear weapons to destroy nuclear weapons. A conventional missile needs a direct hit to take out a warhead. Direct hits are hard to achieve, as the trials proved. A small nuclear weapon must merely explode in the vicinity to destroy a warhead. What will happen if two nuclear weapons explode in the skies above a third country? Over Britain, for instance?  When cornered New Labourites and Tories don't go on about the technicalities. They prefer to bellow instead that America is the sole super-power and if she wants Star Wars she'll get it in the end. Arguments that an unknowable future is inevitable are a sure sign of intellectual bankruptcy. All the fine reasoning of the Atlanticists, developed and polished over generations in the Cold War, has shrunk to servility before American power.   We are now being ruled by New New Labour. Old New Labour pretended it was improving public services while using every scam in the hustler's book to hide their wretched state. New New Labour has no time for manipulation. It's not a thing of shreds and patches but is dedicated to honest 'delivery'.  Tone himself said in the campaign that spin was dead and his party was now 'getting to the substance the whole time'. Presumably, he will soon fire David Blunkett and Alan Milburn.  On 20 April the Education Department issued figures showing the Government was failing quite spectacularly to recruit enough teachers. The Office of National Statistics planned to release the news in March. Blunkett sat on it until a Friday when Parliament was in recess.  On 25 May Blunkett had more glum tidings: six out of 10 teachers had been off sick for at least a fortnight in the past year; the stress of coping with slum schools had a price. He released the survey on the Friday of a Bank Holiday weekend when everyone's attention was distracted by thoughts of the break.  The hospitals were in better shape. On 11 May the Department of Health announced that waiting lists had fallen by 26,000. The statisticians had planned to tell us the cheering tale on 7 May. The feelgood figures were delayed, however, so that Blair and Milburn could use them at a press conference on the first day of campaigning. Documents passed to the Liberal Democrats show neutral civil servants discussed how they might help Labour by organising a photo-opportunity for Milburn at a London hospital.  Alas, the triumph was fleeting. A leaked National Audit Office report revealed that hospitals were 'massaging' waiting lists to meet Government targets. Managers were forcing surgeons to get the numbers down by dealing with simple, minor cases first and leaving the seriously sick to linger in pain. The report was due out in the spring, but was being suppressed until after the election.  The massaging was fruitless. The next month's waiting-list figures jumped up. According to the Department of Health's internal diary I have in front of me, they were meant to be out on 4 June. After a panic, they were held until 8 June, when the media was filled with discussions of the election aftermath and the voters were back in their boxes.  Paul Tyler, the Lib Dem Shadow Leader of the House, said that the spinning 'undermined the democratic process'. Yet he was 'optimistic' that New New Labour would treat Parliament and public with 'respect' in future. He shouldn't hold his breath if he wishes to enjoy a long and fulfilling career.