The British political class adores America. Like a sad old man who fears his young wife will seek her pleasures elsewhere, our &eacute;lite will give the United States whatever she wants if she will only massage the fragile national ego. ('Say our relationship is special, really, really special.  Say it! Now say it as if you mean it! ') Lindis Percy - a radical pacifist midwife and grandmother - is less enchanted. As a peace campaigner, she protests outside US bases. As a citizen, she asks by what legal authority America occupies British territory? It's a good question. The 1945 Labour Government handed land to America without public and Parliamentary debate and without a treaty specifying reciprocal obligations. A Whitehall briefing note from the Treasury Solicitor, which Percy found in public records, confirmed what everyone suspected: RAF officers at the bases and, by extension, their elected masters in Westminster have no power to stop the Americans launching operations which are against Britain's national interest.  Percy has been arrested and jailed many times for her curiosity. Last week she was on trial at Harrogate Magistrates' Court. Her crime was to have protested outside 'RAF' Menwith Hill - which is, in fact, the 13th Field Station of the US National Security Agency. She had draped a Stars and Stripes on the road outside. On it she had written 'George W. Bush... oh dear'. A military vehicle went over the flag, and the driver, the Ministry of Defence Police maintained, became the victim of 'a racially motivated crime' (proving once again that political correctness is an authoritarian conservative's dream).  Her racism took a terrible toll on the American. 'He was quite visibly distressed to drive over his national emblem, which he holds particularly dear,' the prosecutor, Gregor Purcell, told the court. I would have thought that if you're a soldier of a foreign power working in a colonial outpost, you should be a little less precious. Judge Peter Nuttall may have thought the same. In any event, he cleared Percy on Friday.    The questions she raises won't go away as easily. Menwith Hill, near the Yorkshire Dales, and a second US base, 'RAF' Fylingdales on the North Yorkshire Moors, are essential elements of George W Bush's plans to build the 'son of Star Wars' defence against ballistic missiles.  No one near power in Britain supports Star Wars - apart from William Hague and Iain Duncan Smith, who are little more than displaced American nationalists (and whose closeness to power is debatable to say the least). Whitehall has always maintained that defence policy must uphold multilateralism, not unilateralism; that nuclear weapons are a deterrent; and that anyone who disagrees is some kind of traitor undermining patriots' efforts to defend the country they love.  In 1994 Tony Blair proved he was fit to join respectable society when he told his party conference that, whatever delegates said, the next Labour administration would support deterrence and multilateral disarmament. The odd Leftist cried 'betrayal' - Blair had once been a member of CND. But with the Cold War over, the leader could argue that multilateralism would bring a safer world. Russia could be persuaded to decommission her dangerously unstable warheads and prevent the export of nuclear technology. The Chinese military could be calmed. The terrifying possibility of an arms race between India and Pakistan could be averted.   The Americans are destroying all his hopes and shredding Establishment certainties which had flourished for half a century. Deterrence theory holds that if you have nuclear weapons no enemy will launch a nuclear attack for fear of a terrible reprisal. Bush needs the electronic eavesdropping technology at Menwith Hill and Fylingdales to track ballistic missiles and shoot them down before they reach the US. America can attack without fear of retaliation. Multilateralism is based on honouring international treaties. Bush will unilaterally renounce the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, the cornerstone of nuclear arms control, as he develops Star Wars.  As for love of country, the Yorkshire of the moors, dales and Bettys Caf&eacute; Tea Rooms, which Hague claims to love, will   become a target for any enemy of the United States. If the Americans were to shoot down a missile over Britain, it wouldn't disappear like a blip on a computer game, but shower the country with radioactive debris. You need to have an intense dislike of the British in general and Yorkshiremen in particular to contemplate going along with Bush.  The Foreign Office and Ministry of Defence are worried sick that Russia and China will be pushed into militarism and xenophobia. The generals say that Bush's attempts to sell the idea to his allies by pretending Star Wars can protect Western Europe are ludicrous: it's too expensive and can't be made to work.  But Blair refuses to be a patriot. He will not tell the Americans that Britain will not allow its hospitality to be abused. Desperate Ministers have told me in apparent seriousness that they expect the planning departments of Harrogate Council and the North Yorkshire Moors National Park Authority to enter the world of international diplomacy in the PM's place and prevent the Americans expanding Menwith Hill and Fylingdales.  Last month Harrogate Council considered a planning application to install battery-charging houses at RAF Menwith Hill. They will power the Space-Based Infra Red System the Americans will use to identify warheads. The objections of 200 people weren't considered, and elected councillors didn't debate the application. That bogus 'RAF' in RAF Menwith Hill has its uses. The base is on Crown Land and it is a Royal prerogative of the Crown to exempt itself from democratic scrutiny. Monarchical Britain's archaic constitution and the interests of the American Republicans suit each other well. 'We have no control,' said a council spokeswoman. 'There's nothing we can do to stop them.'  Harold Best, the Labour MP for Leeds North West, took the last available option. He wrote to Geoff Hoon, and asked the Defence Secretary to open up the secret process by holding a public inquiry into the expansion of Menwith Hill. Hoon and Best are old friends. Hoon forgot their friendship and decided it would be politic in this instance to ignore the request.  Tony Blair likes to project himself as a strong leader rather than a pathetic old man. But to hang on to America's affections, he is prepared to reverse the U-turn he made in 1994 and leave the defence of deterrence, multilateralism and patriotism to Lindis Percy. Cynics say that politicians always break their promises. But Blair is in a league of his own. He's betrayed his betrayal. <B>Time to arrest this development</B> The May day 'riots' of last year weren't riots at all. They were an undoubted success for the police. No one was hurt. Most of the 7,000 or so demonstrators were peaceful, and officers never lost control of the few who weren't. The protest would have been remembered for the gentle wit of anti-capitalist marchers who dug up the lawn in Parliament Square and planted pot plants, were it not for a tiny detail. The triumph of crowd management was marred when some berk sprayed slogans on the Cenotaph. Reality was overtaken by images of disgusting revolutionaries getting away with dishonouring the memory of the dead.  If a war memorial had been painted in the provinces, few would have noticed. But the graffiti was in the backyard of editors and broadcasters. They ignored the Met's successes and condemned officers for their flabby permissiveness.  It is scarcely original to say that image matters more than substance. But then Sir John Stevens, the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, is scarcely an original man. In the past few days, Stevens and the press have egged each other on like bullies preparing themselves to thrash the living daylights out of their target.   'Anarchist fanatics plan to bring mayhem to Oxford Street on May Day, police warned' (the  Mirror ). 'Sir John Stevens urged law-abiding demonstrators to stay well clear of disturbances by "violent extremists"' (the  Mail ). 'A thousand hardcore protesters plan to spread violence across London during anti-capitalism demonstrations on May Day, Scotland Yard warned' (the  Express ). 'Anarchists plotting May Day mayhem have been training at American action camps, police said yesterday. Up to 50 British extremists are thought to have been on courses to learn urban guerrilla tactics for causing disruption' (the  Mirror again).  Listen to the language - 'militants', 'urban guerrillas', 'extremists' and (very modern) 'hardcore' - and look at the 'wanted' pictures on the news pages. Good policing is calm and proportionate. Good officers know that 'zero tolerance' can be dangerous intolerance and concentrate on the basics of preventing crime and preserving order.  I've no doubt that some protesters would welcome a fight, but what we're hearing from Stevens and his new friends in the press is menacing and hysterical. Officers on duty will be wound-up like springs, as will their adversaries. If there are anarchist deaths, they won't be accidental.