It is a social error of the grossest kind to confuse the Lord Chamberlain and the Lord Great Chamberlain. Penny Russell-Smith, the Queen's PR, strongly implied that the distinction must be grasped by all who wished to shine at the best garden parties. The Lord Chamberlain was not 'that chap in tights who walks backwards at the state opening of Parliament,' as I had foolishly thought. 'No, no, no, no!' she cried. 'That's the Lord Great Chamberlain. The Lord Chamberlain appears at state banquets, not the procession to Parliament.' The Lord Great Chamberlain has Her Majesty's gracious permission to sling a ceremonial key from his belt. He may also have the right to claim the bed slept in by the monarch on the night before a coronation - the authorities conflict on this point. The present Lord Great Chamberlain is seventh Marquess of Cholmondeley (pronounced 'Chumley'). The Chumleys were in an ancient and ugly scrap with the Earls of Ancaster and the Marquesses of Lincolnshire (both pronounced as you'd expect) over who should hold the title until 1902, when the contesting families agreed they should take turns to fill the hereditary office, reign by reign.  The Chumleys didn't know it at the time, but the power-sharing compromise - a Good Friday Agreement for the English aristocracy - was a great bargain. The lottery of biology gave them Elizabeth Windsor, whose reign began in 1952 and shows no signs of stopping. A noble personage connected to the last of the Ancasters or Lincolnshires - the titles are extinct, as I'm sure you know - will be left with the inevitably short reign of an aged Charles III as a consolation prize. The  Guardian and  Independent  say Lord Carrington could be that personage, but my mind had been boggled by Lord Great Chamberlains by the time I dug out their reports and I had lost the will to fact check.  I did find that the completely separate Lord Chamberlain is Richard Luce. He has an ornate key of his very own, but must keep it in his hip pocket. He is 'the Firm's' chief executive officer, who vets candidates for Palace jobs and is the chairman of monthly board meetings of royal department heads. Lord Luce was appointed by and is answerable to the Queen, and it must be his duty as a courtier to work to keep the office of head of state as the irrevocable freehold of a clan of reactionary billionaires; to ensure that there is a Charles III. The most slack-jawed monarchist would find it hard to argue he has the fierce independence necessary to produce a rigorous review of royal conduct.  Buckingham Palace has argued just   that. Sophie Wessex's bletherings demanded that something must be done. The Palace responded by saying Luce would hold an inquiry into how royals should behave in the business world. His career as a courtier is not the only handicap he must struggle to overcome as he tries to draw up rules for an open, modern monarchy. I can't, for example, see how he can be anything but pleased by the Wessex girl's sighs that an ignorant public had failed to see the statesmanly qualities of Willie Hague, or by her weird portrayal of Gordon Brown as a blood-sucking Bolshevik. Luce was a Tory MP from 1971 to 1992.  If he is a true monarchist as well as a loyal Conservative, he should also find it difficult to condemn her PR firm's exploitation of royal connections. Monarchy is the exploitation of connections. If you don't have a blood connection to the House of Windsor you can never be head of state, however wise or popular you may be.  In one respect, however, Luce is well-qualified for the job. His career has been a preparation for the moment when he would be called to play one of the Establishment's finest gambits: the incurious inquiry.  After Margaret Thatcher came to power in 1979, Luce became the Minister of State in the Foreign Office responsible for the Falkland Islands. (He served under the Foreign Secretary, Lord Carrington, who may yet be the next Lord Great Chamberlain.) The FO dismissed the belligerent noises coming from the Argentine military junta as typical Latin machismo. The Argentines invaded and about 1,000 servicemen (British and Argentine) died in an unnecessary war. Luce and Carrington resigned in April 1982 before the fighting had scarcely begun.  Their departures are remembered as honourable political acts. Successive Foreign Office Ministers had suggested to the Argentines that Britain was prepared to share the sovereignty of the Falklands. It wasn't a ludicrous policy then, and is a sensible one today, now that Argentina is a stable democracy. For all their other failings, Luce and Carrington didn't convince the Argentines that Britain had no interest in defending the islands by announcing that the survey ship Endurance would be withdrawn from the South Atlantic - the news came from the Ministry of Defence. Nor did they persuade Argentina that Britain cared so little for the islanders it would force them to accept second-class British citizenship - that was the Home Office. They could scarcely be blamed for the incompetence of the intelligence services which weren't able to tell the Cabinet if enemy forces were going to invade until six hours after they had landed. Their self-sacrifice protected many   backs - including the exposed back of Margaret Thatcher.  In February 1983 Luce was reappointed to his old job in the Foreign Office. His restoration was helped by the incurious official inquiry of the 77-year-old Lord Franks. Franks detailed all the blunders which had led to the invasion in his report of January 1983. But a feeling of detachment descended on him, when he had to name the someones who had blundered. It was so powerful it detached him from the evidence and compelled him to conclude that: 'We would not be justified in attaching any criticism or blame to the present Government for the Argentine junta's decision to commit its act of unprovoked aggression.'  Luce was back in the game and quickly concerned himself with arms sales to Saddam Hussein. As far as the public knew, there were no sales. Britain had declared that it would not sell 'lethal arms' to either side in the Iran-Iraq war. For reasons of commerce and diplomacy - Saddam was the favourite of the West and Saudi Arabia - military equipment   was still trundled to Iraq.  Luce wanted to enforce true neutrality and proposed a tough statement that no weapons would be sold to either side. This raised what Paul Foot and Tim Laxton describe in the indispensable  Private Eye pamphlet on the scandal as a 'howl of anguish' across a Whitehall fearful that huge sales to Saudi Arabia and Iraq would be lost. Luce was seduced and gradually his admirable statement of principle became what the late Alan Clark, a Minister very keen to merchandise death, called 'Cheshire Cat' guidelines.  'They were high-sounding,' said the old groper, 'combining it seemed both moral and practical considerations, and yet imprecise enough to allow real policy consideration to override. Far from being restrictive [the formula] was open to argument in every one of its elements.'  When Sir Richard Scott was called to investigate arms-to-Iraq, he was struck by Luce's determination to release the statement of policy very quietly. In a note from Luce to Geoffrey Howe, he wrote that he did not want 'a high-profile' announcement but 'careful background briefings to selected Members of Parliament and the press'.  The Scott Report remains the epitaph of the Tories. Its account of how Ministers preferred suppressing evidence which would save the innocent directors of Matrix Churchill from prison to having their dealings with Saddam exposed can leave readers never wanting to see another Conservative government. But when he had to apportion blame, even Scott became an incurious inquirer. Although he had said that Parliament and public were 'designedly' misled, he concluded that Ministers had 'not acted with any duplicitous intent'.  At least the Scott Report was published and readers can take a radically different view. Last week Buckingham Palace said the Queen may not publish the results of Luce's inquiry. Penny Russell-Smith went further and told me that the inquiry wasn't really an inquiry at all - incurious or otherwise. It was merely a 'consultation' between the Queen, her courtiers and the odd civil servant. Excluded from the list was the House of Commons.  I forgot to ask if she knew of any other modern country that would put up with an unelected head of state determining her own rules of conduct without taking instructions from elected representatives? Or with a revolving door between the Conservative Party and the palace? Or Lord Great Chumleys who scuttle backwards in the legislature?