Middle England is patronised as well as pampered. Focus groupies and market researchers strain to probe and manipulate its passions. lite politicians and pundits drop their aitches and pose as its tribunes. What's left of the Left confirms its impotence by moaning from the sidelines about a wretched political system driven by the imperative to do nothing that might upset Worcester Women and Mondeo Men as they raise 2.5 children in pebble-dashed houses. Middle Englanders are animated by doltish complacency and irrational fears. Gestures on asylum and crime are created to placate them. They are a greedy, rootless tribe who don't give a damn for public services and the common good. Their acquiesence can be bought with a few tax cuts and cheaper petrol. These are the last people on the planet you would expect to revolt against the Private Finance Initiative. To be honest, you wouldn't expect them to have heard of the Private Finance Initiative. Yet, marvellously, Worcestershire is defying every slander and is in open, furious rebellion. There is a fair chance that it will return one of the few independent MPs to be elected since 1945 because it can't stand what Gordon Brown has done to the NHS.  The candidate, Richard Taylor, is the most refreshing and unlikely politician I've met. The 66-year-old retired rheumatologist holds a quaint belief in the power of democracy to challenge the status quo. New Labour MPs who triangulated with Old Tories, and Old Tories who triangulated with New Labour, lost that years ago and are greeting the prospect that he may well take the Wyre Forest seat with incomprehending panic. The game of British politics isn't meant to produce results like that. Independents are meant to be eccentrics who are lucky if they can save their deposits.  Taylor never wanted to be an MP. He left Kidderminster Hospital after 23 years' service with the expectation that he would fill his days by indulging his passions for classic cars and ornithology. He was transformed from a retiring twitcher to avenging angel by what should have been a nugget of cheering news. In 1997 Tony Blair pledged that if he came to power he would build a new hospital in Worcester. Political junkies will remember that Worcester women were all the rage at the time. They were the English version of Bill Clinton's soccer mums; aspiring types who didn't like paying taxes but worried about the state of the schools and hospitals.  They had plenty to worry about. For decades, pretty much everyone who needed treatment in Worcester had complained that the infirmary was split across ancient buildings on three sites. A new hospital had been promised repeatedly but never appeared. 'It's tremendously important to make sure it goes forward in the quickest and best way possible, and we will do that,' Blair told Worcester women. He took Downing Street and David Lock, one of his followers, took Wyre Forest from the   Tories. Worcestershire has learned the hard way that the new era of Blairism merely heralded more of the same. Brown and the Treasury insisted that New Labour stuck with the Conservative regime's Private Finance Initiative (PFI). Instead of raising the funds for public works through taxation or government borrowing, public authorities had to allow private companies to own and manage each project and charge taxpayers for its use.  This is a fantastically profligate waste of money which should destroy Brown's reputation as a prudent son of the manse. The Government can borrow at the lowest interest rates because it doesn't default on its debts. Private companies have to pay higher charges and make a return for their investors. Because Brown insists that every scheme should be financed privately, developers can also negotiate in the knowledge that they have the other side over a barrel. Thus the new Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, to quote the best example, will require the local health authority to give a consortium £30 million a year at today's prices for 30 years (£900m in total). If the Government had paid for the hospital directly, the bill would have been £180m.  The price of the new Worcester Royal Infirmary rose between 1996 and 2000 by 118 per cent - a study by Professor Allyson Pollock and her colleagues at University College, London, showed. To meet the extortionate demands, Kidderminster Hospital was reduced to a glorified GP's surgery. The accident and emergency and intensive care units were closed. A high-tech block, which cost £15m, had to be mothballed and will soon be gutted.  Mass demonstrations greeted the destruction of an institution whose League of Friends had collected £2.5m in the 1990s from grateful patients and their families. At first, the protesters assumed the threat to the hospital was a mistake New Labour would rectify. Lock was ready to die in the last ditch with them. 'The community are not prepared to accept the Health Authority's proposals,' he cried. 'We need Kidderminster Hospital! We need a full range of services!' There was also the nice new Prime Minister. Surely his caring words for Worcester Woman weren't humbug? Worcestershire had a direct line. It could bypass the evil advisors who must be misleading him and tell the good king about the unhappiness in his favourite county. The young Tony Blair was a great admirer of Led Zeppelin and had spent many an evening playing 'Stair way to Heaven' on air and real guitars. As luck would have it, Robert Plant lived near Kidderminster, and was as angry as everyone else. He invited Blair to see the crisis for himself. A star-struck PM replied on 20 October 1998:   Dear Robert  Thank you very much for inviting me to come and see you later this year - I am certainly a Led Zeppelin fan! I would be delighted to come if my diary allows it and my Diary Secretary will be in touch if we can arrange something. I am aware of the situation at Kidderminster_ Whatever decision is reached, I am sure Kidderminster Hospital will continue to provide a range of health care services to the people of Kidderminster and the surrounding area. Good luck with the tour - keep in touch.  Yours ever  Tony Blair   Underneath the typed letter Blair scrawled in his own Prime Ministerial    hand:  'I can't tell you how many memories of you I have!'   Blair never came and Kidderminster's health care services were trashed. Many would have given up when they learned even Led Zep couldn't prevail. But Taylor and his allies transformed spontaneous anger into a political movement. They formed their own party - Health Concern - and educated the public on the iniquities of the PFI. Health Concern is now the largest party on the local council and Taylor has a fair chance of being the next MP.  I hope he is, in part because he combines self-deprecation with a steady determination to alleviate his neighbours' suffering; in part because a Taylor victory would teach machine politicians that democratic manners require the honouring of promises and a little humility. Lock's support for his hospital disappeared when he became a junior Minister. He now insists that the downsizing of Kidderminster has nothing to do with the PFI and quotes consultants and health bureaucrats who say it is 'not safe or clinically feasible' to provide accident and emergency services in his town. They are being disingenuous. The Regional Health Authority admitted in 1997 that the cost of meeting extortionate PFI bills had everything to do with the assault on a hospital which had provided safe A&amp;E services for years. ('The issue of configuration of services and the financial pictures in Worcestershire are intimately connected,' wrote the director.)  Lock treats the arrival of an independent as an affront to the established order. If Taylor went to the Commons and began 'kicking up a fuss,' he said, 'he would isolate himself from responsible politicians by showing he is unwilling to work with anyone.' He didn't grasp that in a democracy citizens are entitled to fuss until their 'responsible' rulers take notice. Or chuck them out if they don't. Nor did the Tories, who complained that Health Concern was preventing them retaking the seat, as if they were the sole legitimate contestant.  Taylor's success challenges the stereotype of Middle England. In London, the Treasury is insisting on the part privatisation of the Tube. As with PFI hospitals, a safe service will be made dangerous at enormous cost to the public purse. In Middle England, sophisticated citizens are fighting back. But although the Lib Dems and the Socialist Alliance offer an alternative to the battering of London Underground, the opinion polls say that the peasants and bumpkins of the metropolis will tug their forelocks and vote for their New Labour betters regardless.