From now on, when people talk about the Middle East peace process, you'll have to ask: which one? Israelis and Palestinians are as unreconciled as ever, but now the war of Palestinian against Palestinian has plumbed a new depth. The two movements which began the week joined in a national unity government, Hamas and Fatah, have spent the last few days in direct, bloody conflict. The result is that Hamas now rules over Gaza as a distinct separate entity, while Fatah controls the West Bank. This is not what the world meant by a two-state solution. There are multiple causes for deep concern. First, though the streets of Gaza are said to be quieted now, there has been terrible loss of life: more than 90 killed in the current fighting alone. Eye-witness accounts have spoken of summary executions in the streets. Second, a Hamas-controlled Gaza is a gloomy prospect. If the announcement by a Hamas spokesman that "The era of justice and Islamic rule has arrived" sends a shiver down the spine, it's partly because we can guess at what that might entail. It's true that many inside Hamas are simply nationalists of an Islamic hue, committed to a fierce form of Palestinian patriotism unsullied by the corruption and compromises of the secular Fatah. But one Palestinian notable I spoke to earlier today warned me not to misunderstand Hamas: it includes some hardcore Islamists, guided by the teachings of the Muslim Brotherhood. "They see this as their opportunity to build an Islamist state," he said. For those whose prime interest is in bringing some kind of peace to Israelis and Palestinians, Hamas's coup in Gaza is bleak news for a simpler reason. While there are two Palestinian leaderships, there can be no prospect of a peace agreement. Israel can't sign a deal with Mahmoud Abbas if he speaks only for the Palestinians of the West Bank. There can be no peace between nations when one of them is locked in a civil war. There is just one glimmer of light. The desperate state of Gaza has led both Israel and Fatah to come to the same conclusion. Both Israeli prime minister Ehud Olmert and Abbas have called for the deployment of an international force in Gaza to restore order. Israel would like such a presence to stop the Qassam rockets that Hamas and others have fired from Gaza onto Israel's southern towns and villages. Fatah, meanwhile, would look to an international force to wrest control of Gaza from its Hamas rivals. So there is mutual interest here. But the larger advantage of an international presence is that it could change the dynamic of the conflict. For 40 years, Israel has been the occupier of the Palestinian lands won in 1967. If a precedent is set for international stewardship of even part of those territories, then that would mark a significant step away from Israeli control - and towards the day when Israel cedes those territories for good. Indeed, a few years ago a group of Middle East analysts floated the notion of an international protectorate as a way station on the road towards a Palestinian state. The trouble is, Hamas will not agree to the proposal as it now stands, as a Gaza-only operation. It won't agree to a force that looks as if its chief purpose is to provide for Israel's security - and to drive Hamas from power. As one Palestinian source puts it, Hamas won't let the Israeli occupation be replaced by an international occupation. The only way Hamas's opposition might be overcome is if the putative international force is deployed in the West Bank - even only nominally - as well as in Gaza. Such a move could then be presented as more than simply a blocking operation against Hamas. Olmert should look at the idea seriously. He is, after all, committed to an eventual Israeli withdrawal from the Palestinian population centres on the West Bank. Why should he insist on the privilege of policing them himself if an international force is ready to do the job instead? If, symbolically, it looks like the beginning of an Israeli pullback from control of the West Bank, he should have no problem with that either. That, I repeat, is the policy on which his government was elected. If Hamas, Fatah and Israel all agree to let in an international force, only one question will remain: which countries would volunteer to send their troops into one of the bitterest war zones in the world? The French, Italians and Spaniards have so far taken a lead in advancing the proposal. Time to step forward, gentlemen?