From this distance, the Palestinians look to be in dire straits - even by their wretched standards. A people who have plunged the depths of misery seem set to sink even lower. Denied financial aid by an international community that turned off the cash after Hamas won its unexpected majority in January, the Palestinians are collectively going broke. Gaza is especially badly hit. Women are selling off their jewellery just to feed their children. A gang of men were caught digging up the ground: they wanted to pull out municipal water pipes and sell them for scrap. According to B'Tselem, the Israeli human rights group, Gaza's medical system is in "crisis" thanks to "grave shortages" of supplies.Nor can Palestinians trade their way out of poverty. The main crossing out of Gaza, at Karni, is closed more than it's open - preventing farmers from getting their perishable produce to market: their strawberries just lie rotting, denying the growers their livelihood. The nights bring no respite. Gazans are living with round-the-clock artillery shelling, which Israel says is retaliation for the Qassam rockets fired by Palestinians over the border. The West Bank has experienced multiple Israeli raids, leaving civilians, including children, dead.And now, Palestinians are turning on each other, with street fights and shoot-outs between Hamas and groups aligned with the old rulers of Fatah. This week, Fatah said it had defused a bomb intended to kill the head of the Palestinian security services, a man loyal to Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president and leader of Fatah. On Saturday, the head of Palestinian intelligence, another Fatah loyalist, was injured when a blast tore through a lift. Fatah blames Hamas for both attacks.It all smacks of a society turning on itself, destroying its infrastructure, killing its own leaders. But those closest to the reality plead for caution, counselling that things might look worse than they are. There is no humanitarian disaster yet, they say, though there could be one. B'Tselem notes that while Gazan hospitals are short of medical supplies, West Bank clinics are getting by. The group says that movement has become more restricted between the various regional blocs of the West Bank, but easier within them. And Israel's new defence minister, the Labour leader and long-time anti-occupation activist Amir Peretz, has promised more openings at Karni. Meanwhile, Middle East analyst Hussein Agha urges scepticism about talk of civil war. The Fatah-Hamas clashes owe more to economic, familial and personal rivalries than they do to a political clash. "This is rivalry over fiefdoms, turf wars," he says.It's right to be rigorous in these matters. But even the coolest heads worry where things are heading. There's only so long a people dependent on foreign help can be starved of cash. Up to one in four of the Palestinian population are employees of the Palestinian Authority, and yet it has no money to pay anyone - even the prime minister, Hamas's Ismail Haniyeh, has not received a penny since taking office.There are glimmers of hope. This week, Israel released about &pound;5m of Palestinian tax revenues it had collected but had refused to hand over. Meanwhile, the EU was reported to have found a way to funnel cash to Palestinian teachers, doctors and pensioners while bypassing Hamas - an approach backed earlier this month by the Quartet of the EU, the US, the UN and Russia. Yet just yesterday the US House of Representatives approved the Palestinian Anti-Terrorism Act, a set of sanctions condemned by Americans for Peace Now, an avowedly Zionist organisation, as draconian and sweeping.The moral objections to this latest US move, and the whole international policy of denying aid to the Palestinians, are obvious: it punishes Palestinians for their democratic choice of Hamas in free and fair elections; and it's hard to explain a world where sanctions are imposed not on the occupier but the occupied: this is the politics of Lewis Carroll.The counter-argument is clear enough. It says it is unreasonable for anyone to expect normal relations with a movement still committed to terrorism. Until two years ago, Hamas was in the business of staging regular July 7 style attacks - suicide bombings of buses and the like. Would we ever urge Tony Blair to hand over hefty cash payments to the planners of 7/7, however many votes they had won? (A clue to our response can be found in Northern Ireland, where Sinn F&eacute;in is still deemed unfit for government despite its democratic mandate and complete abandonment of terrorism.)This argument may be logical, but it should not be good enough for Israel. Put simply, even if Israel is not persuaded of the moral case for abandoning its current stance, it should do so for its own self-interest.First, if it allows a humanitarian crisis to engulf the Palestinian territories, the rest of the world will be forced to act - and will end up dealing with Hamas after all. Israel wants Hamas to remain persona non grata, which means it has to avoid a dramatic deterioration.Second, the error behind a sanctions policy is its assumption that the victims of sanctions turn on their own government. But the evidence already points the other way, to Palestinians rallying around the new leadership. "It becomes an issue of pride," says Tel Aviv University analyst Gary Sussman. "When people fight sanctions it becomes a national project." Palestinians are not blaming Hamas for their suffering, but the US and Israel.Third, and related, is the assumption that if Hamas can be starved into defeat, if sanctions can somehow trigger "regime failure", then a more amenable leadership will take its place. The flaw here is historical. Time after time Israel has sought to bypass Palestinians' chosen representatives, deeming them too extreme. Eventually, it has had little choice but to deal with the official leadership - only to find it has been overtaken by a more radical alternative. Israel ignored and undermined Fatah, so it got Hamas. Now, Palestinians warn, if Israel won't deal with Hamas it will eventually face Islamic Jihad or even al-Qaida, which is already making inroads in Gaza. When that day comes, Israel will regret missing its chance to deal with the relative moderates of Hamas.There's one last, self-interested reason why Israel should want Hamas to get its hands on the money it needs. "It will keep them busy," says Agha. With a society to run, there will be less appetite for a return to violence. As things stand, warns Agha, some within Hamas are already wondering what reward 17 months of ceasefire have brought: they are talking of breaking away, perhaps to align themselves with al-Qaida and its methods.So Israel should take the lead, urging the US, Britain and the rest of the world to allow this money through. That's not a call for negotiations between Hamas and Israel: few believe the time is ripe for that. Instead, Ehud Olmert should get on with the next phase of Israeli withdrawals from occupied territory while Hamas starts state-building. Meanwhile, the two sides can engage in day-to-day, practical cooperation - without either having to take the unpalatable step of recognising the other. It will be parallel unilateralism, the two sides moving alone - but in sync.None of this offers much heroism. It does not speak the language of moral, noble purpose. It speaks of self-interest. Israel must prevent disaster befalling the Palestinians - for Israel's own sake.