They used to say of Israel that it was the land without grandfathers. A young country, founded less than 60 years ago, its first citizens were immigrants and refugees, many of them arriving here as children without parents, let alone anyone older. That seemed to leave a need, one that was met by regularly asking an old man (or woman) to serve as their leader. After David Ben-Gurion, Golda Meir and Yitzhak Rabin, the 77-year-old Ariel Sharon fitted the bill perfectly. Except yesterday Israel had to brace itself for the loss of its grandfather."It's like everybody's a relative: the whole country's glued to the radio or the TV, waiting for details from the hospital," said Tom Segev, the acclaimed author who has chronicled the development of Israeli society for decades. On buses, in shops, on radio phone-ins and internet talkboards, people traded what little nuggets of information they could pick up.Some suspected the worst, fearing that Sharon had died on Wednesday night and the authorities were keeping it hidden. Rumours of the prime minister's death became so intense yesterday lunchtime that the director-general of the Hadassah hospital had to come out and swear he was telling the truth and would bring any news as soon as he got it. He spoke like a man used to calming the nerves of an anxious family.Most Israelis, even those who never voted for him, concede that the passing of Ariel Sharon, when it comes, will be more than the demise of an elected politician. According to Segev, "Sharon is the last of the Israeli giants, a man who had come to represent the founding fathers of this country." Slipping between the past and present tense, the writer explained that Sharon somehow managed to avoid the taint of routine, everyday politics: he was identified instead with Israel's founding ideals - patriotism, independence, military prowess, statehood. Even the mud of a long-running corruption scandal, which bubbled up again on Wednesday, just hours before Sharon's massive stroke, could not stick to him. "He developed the aura of a mythological hero."And yet Israel could not mourn his passing. There was no funereal music on the radio, no candles or vigils visible outside his Jerusalem residence. "He is still alive!" retorted Israelis, when asked for a premature tribute. Instead, they said the prime minister was in their prayers - as if he might perform a miracle and come back from the dead.It was a limbo the Middle East had experienced once before, just over a year ago when Sharon's old nemesis, Yasser Arafat, hovered between life and death in a hospital in Paris. Then Palestinians had to pause, not knowing whether they were about to grieve, and yesterday it was Israelis' turn. If and when the final word comes - and last night's hospital briefing suggested that the prime minister will remain in an induced coma for at least a couple more days - how will Israelis react?There will be a sense of loss, most certainly, but few predict an outpouring of affection or tenderness. For one thing, Sharon spent years as a hate figure not only around the world - where many still regard him as an unindicted war criminal for his role in the 1982 invasion of Lebanon and a string of other military actions - but in his own country. Many on the Israeli left could not forgive the Lebanon war, while the anger of the Israeli right was fed with fresher memories. "If he dies, I won't be upset," said 18- year-old Daniel Slomnicki, a religious student sipping coffee at Cafe Atara. "I don't care about him because he gave away land."If the siege of Beirut was Sharon's great crime in the eyes of the left, last year's pullout from Gaza was his betrayal of the right - the move that few ever believed he would make and which cast his entire career in a new light.For those between left and right, Sharon's past was forgotten or at least superseded by this new incarnation. He was the man of the centre, his new Kadima party embodying a national consensus that Israel would have to reduce its occupation of Palestinian lands in return for a final, secure border. That view brought agreement, but not joy or excitement. So Sharon was neither loved nor hailed as a harbinger of peace, as Rabin had been a decade earlier. Rather, he was accepted, pragmatically, as the man to do what had to be done. He would be the surgeon, charged with performing a painful but necessary operation.And now the surgeon is lying unconscious. "It's as if we're living in a Greek tragedy," said the Tel Aviv University analyst Gary Sussman, recalling Rabin's death at the height of the Oslo peace process in 1995. "Every time there's a leader who has what it takes to save us from ourselves, he gets taken from us."So Israel is sombre and watchful, as it listens to the bleep, bleep, bleep of its leader's heart. There is quiet satisfaction that a situation that in some countries would trigger a crisis, even a coup d'&eacute;tat, is passing in orderly, constitutional calm. But when Israelis look ahead, they see an utterly changed, churned-up political landscape. They are confused by it - and now there is no grandfather to guide them.