Gerald Kaufman had better get his tuxedo to the dry-cleaners. He could be about to get an unexpected black-tie invitation - to the Israeli embassy. Kaufman wouldn't expect to be on Israel's social radar. As a vituperative critic of the country, recently calling for Europe to impose sanctions on Jerusalem, he has long been reviled by many of his fellow British Jews. But he might now find Israel's door open. For the Jewish state has a new man in London. Zvi Hefetz has just arrived as Israel's ambassador, taking up what surely ranks as one of diplomacy's toughest missions. And he promises that encounters with Israel's critics - including the Jewish ones - will be among his top priorities.  "They will be first," Hefetz says in his first British newspaper interview. "If I want to influence people, I have to meet people who are unsupportive. Maybe trade unionists, intellectuals, Palestinians - people who don't share our views. Everybody who's open to real dialogue will be welcome."  If critics are what Hefetz wants, he won't have far to look. Many Israelis, and Jews along with them, believe Europe has become intensely hostile to Israel since the second intifada erupted in 2000, with liberal circles casting it as a pariah state, a 21st-century replacement for apartheid South Africa. Visit the embassy in a smart corner of Kensington, west London, and you soon see this is not just a matter of angry letters in newspapers. The street is all but sealed off, protected by armed police and state-of-the-art anti-terror equipment. This is not paranoia: 10 years ago this week the embassy was bombed.  As if making Israel's case in the era of Ariel Sharon was not challenge enough, Hefetz has been dealt a particularly tough hand. His appointment was the most controversial in the post's history, sparking a legal challenge in Israel that went to the nation's highest court and an unprecedented revolt by Britain's usually devotedly loyal Jewish organisations.  The nub of the complaint, both here and in Jerusalem, was that Hefetz was woefully unqualified to represent his country. His detractors said Hefetz had buffed up his CV to exaggerate his diplomatic experience; that he had no knowledge of international affairs; that he had only got the job because he was a mate of Ariel Sharon's son, Omri, and - worst of all - that as a Russian immigrant, he barely spoke English. Jewish community groups, who normally allow not a shard of light to stand between them and the Israeli government, were suddenly angry and vocal. They wanted a media-savvy advocate who could put on a good show for Newsnight and Any Questions? Veteran activist Joy Wolfe, president of the Manchester Zionist Central Council, declared it "a total insult to those of us who devote a large portion of our lives to trying to promote Israel's good name". Henry Grunwald, president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, raised Hefetz's nomination in a private meeting with Sharon himself.  In the end, Israel's supreme court threw out the petition against Hefetz, deciding that he had no special ties to the prime minister and that the details in his CV were accurate. The new ambassador's defenders say the whole storm was cooked up by career diplomats in the Israeli foreign ministry, resentful that a plum job had been handed to a novice outsider. (Hefetz was the personal appointment of the foreign minister, Silvan Shalom - who, more than Sharon, is probably his key patron.)  But that still leaves the question of his English. Hefetz knows he is under close scrutiny, every meeting is a de facto English oral exam. I'm sure he is showing off his grasp of idiom when he says, early in our conversation, "After a month here, I feel like an old timer." But the effect is spoiled moments later when he is holding forth on Israelis' strong bonds of affection with all things British. "I studied law. How you say it here? I read law. First time I have been in London, I went to Old Bailey and Courts of Inn! For me to see Old Bailey it is like to go to see best movie!" The combination of smiling enthusiasm and heavy Russian accent, still pronounced even though Hefetz moved to Israel when he was 14, can make the ambassador seem like Sacha Baron Cohen's alter ego, Borat. "Israelis love British TV. Yes, Minister is a genius! And House of Fawlty!"  All of which makes you fear for his first bout with Paxman or Humphrys. But it is far from the whole story. For Hefetz is no grinning ingenu. He has considerable charm, a winning modesty and exudes a very undiplomatic kind of power. He rose to prominence in Israeli business, initially as a lieutenant of the Russian media magnate Vladimir Gusinksy and eventually in his own right. Before his dispatch to London, he was deputy chairman of the Maariv group, publishers of one of Israel's biggest (and right-leaning) newspapers, as well as co-owning the Hapoel Tel Aviv basketball team. The combination gives the 47-year-old Hefetz a certain muscle, a vague whiff of Tony Soprano. This may be sheer cultural prejudice. As Hefetz told the Haaretz liberal daily last year, "When Israelis see a Russian who made a lot of money, they automatically think, mafia."  In fact, a different stereotype may be more fitting. For Hefetz's story is the classic fable of the immigrant boy made good. If there is an Israeli dream, he has lived it. Born in Riga, Latvia, in the old Soviet Union, his parents saw their property expropriated by the communist authorities and were exiled to Siberia for 16 years. They eventually got out and made it to Israel. The teenage Hefetz was the only Russian in his neighbourhood, determinedly turning himself into an Israeli. He worked nights, loading newspapers on to delivery trucks. The newspaper in question was Maariv, a third of which he would eventually own. Next he served, like most Jewish Israelis, in the army, eventually becoming a major in intelligence at the time of the Lebanon war. Was he involved? "If you are in the army during war, you can't not be involved. But I was a brain person."  Hefetz sees all this as a plus. "I'm a true, authentic representative of Israel today. I was an immigrant, I made my way in Israel from zero." Since a million Israelis, one in six, are arrivals from the old Soviet Union he has a point.  Besides, say allies, his rags-to-riches success in business could make Hefetz an ideal trade envoy for Israel, working the boardrooms, pushing for investment. "He doesn't want to be a flash, Hello! or OK! magazine type ambassador," says one Jewish community player who knows well the interface between Israel and Whitehall. "Nor is he going to be a foreign office wallah, all nods and winks." Hefetz knows how to talk to business people and that, says this admirer, is a "realistic goal to aim at".  Where does that leave the role that those Jewish activists who opposed him (and who have now formally welcomed him) regard as so central - that of media performer? Language alone will make it an uphill struggle for Hefetz. In an encounter with Jenny Tonge or Tom Paulin, he will be at a disadvantage. But he is not stupid.  I set a trap for him, asking if he shares the analysis of his prime minister who recently told the Jews of France that they should leave that "wildly anti-Semitic" country for Israel. Does he believe the Jews of Britain should make a similar move?  "No, British Jews have to live, like every free person, wherever they like to live. And Israel has to be always welcome to every Jew who expresses his desire to live there. I'm not entitled to say to British Jews, 'You are wrong, you should live there.'"  Was Sharon equally unentitled to say that to French Jews? "He applied the point to French Jews, not British Jews or American Jews, because there's a high wave of anti-semitism there." With French Jews feeling insecure, Hefetz says, it was Sharon's duty to reach out to them; it was "humanitarian". Britain is a different case. For all the criticisms of Israel in the liberal press, his immediate impression is that Britain is not a hostile environment for Jews, nor even for the cause of Israel.  He should have no trouble defending Sharon. He shares his views on all the core issues, endorsing the official Israeli policy to "remove" Yasser Arafat if necessary: "As soon as he leaves the stage, it will be to the benefit of his own people." He echoes the Sharon view that there is no plausible partner on the Palestinian side, and wholeheartedly backs Israel's security barrier or wall. It has, he says, stopped terrorist attacks that would have killed between 50 and 100 Israelis, if not many more.  And yet, Hefetz has been described in the Israeli press as leftwing and told Haaretz: "I am certainly not a Likudnik." Is that plausible? He offers a couple of clues. He says Sharon's proposed pullout from Gaza should be welcomed because it could lead eventually to face-to-face negotiations on the rest of the occupied territories - what Hefetz calls "the Vest Bank". That's a departure, at least in tone, from the Sharon line which speaks only of unilateral moves rather than talks.  Of the failed Camp David peace talks of 2000, he says: "Maybe we, both parties, blew this opportunity," departing again from the official position which places exclusive blame on Arafat. And there's this: "I don't consider the Palestinians an enemy. I think they're suffering, as we are suffering."  This hardly makes Hefetz a leftie or a peacenik. But it might signal a slight change in approach. Gerald, stand by for that invitation.