They're playing that old Joni Mitchell song, Big Yellow Taxi, on the radio again and it couldn't have come at a better time. "And don't it always seem to go," inquires the plaintive chorus, "that you don't know what you've got till it's gone?" The first people to hear that line back in 1970 might have taken it as a lament for the lost tranquillity of American life before the Vietnam war. Maybe the new generation lapping up the current Counting Crows' version hear their own yearning for the days before wartime. But the people who should be chanting that chorus loudest this week are not the peaceniks and protesters, but the men who plotted and planned this war. For it's the Washington hawks who have greatest reason to identify with Joni's line. In the last few days they have come to appreciate something they used to take for granted or, worse still, mock outright.  I'm thinking of international rules. Since the day the Bushies took charge, they have disdained the very idea of cooperation with other nations. Multilateralism was for wimps; go-it-alone, America First unilateralism was the future. The early demonstrations of the new Garbo doctrine - America "wants to be alone" - form a list that has grown wearily familiar: the US trashing of the Kyoto protocol on global warming, the refusal to back the new international criminal court and the threatened break from the anti-ballistic missile treaty with Russia. Such pacts and rules were just ropes to tie down the American Gulliver, ran the new thinking: the Bushies would slash them all and break free. The ultimate exercise of the new freedom started a week ago today: a pre-emptive war unleashed by Bush, "at a time of our choosing", with not a shred of international authorisation.  But it's taken just a few days of desert combat to remind Washington that the old, collective system was not all French vetoes and pesky third world countries refusing to vote the right way. Multilateralism had its plus side, too - even for America.  Take Donald Rumsfeld, lambasting the Iraqis for their mistreatment of US prisoners of war, paraded on TV like so much booty. How could Baghdad ignore the Geneva convention!, he raged on Sunday. And then perhaps he remembered. Wasn't the Geneva convention the same document he had cheerfully binned when it came to shackling al-Qaida suspects at Camp X-Ray? It seemed little more than an irritant back then, a way for bleeding-heart busybodies to stop America locking up the bad guys. But now, perhaps, Rumsfeld is coming to see its value.  The US might even be undergoing a similar pang of regret about the United Nations itself. What a pain that body was in the lead-up to war! But it could be essential to governing a post-Saddam Iraq. At least one faction, centred on Colin Powell's State Department, holds that view, believing that only a UN administration can attract funding from the rest of the world - and that a blue-helmeted presence would be less provocative to Iraq's people, and less likely to stir resistance, than an occupying force governing alone under the stars and stripes. In other words, a UN seal on an American victory would make US servicemen and women less vulnerable.  But this sudden realisation of the UN's value may have come too late. Jacques Chirac is in no hurry to give UN legitimacy to what he calls the US and UK "belligerents." Right now, he believes London and Washington made this mess in Iraq - they can clear it up. Tony Blair knows how much of a fix the warmaking coalition is in; hence his near-desperate plea yesterday for Europe and the US to come together and his trip to see both Bush and the UN's Kofi Annan later this week. He knows that having snubbed the UN before the war, it won't be easy for the US to win them over now.  The US fares no better when it accuses Russian companies of selling Iraq sensitive military kit - from night-vision goggles to radio-jammers - in violation of UN sanctions and a raft of arms control agreements. As Vladimir Putin might have reminded Bush in their Monday telephone call, arms accords didn't seem to matter much to the White House 18 months ago when they were threatening to tear up the ABM treaty. Similarly, when Bush promises to prosecute Iraqi top brass for war crimes, he should pause to wonder which court might house such a trial. It surely can't be the international criminal court which America has derided from the start.  Whether it's PoWs or rebuilding Iraq, arms or war crimes, Washington is learning the hard way that even a hyperpower cannot easily act alone. Not that the collective tools don't exist. They do and they were there for America to use; but the US didn't want to know. Isn't life always like that? Joni understood: "You don't know what you've got till it's gone."  So will the US have a road-to-Baghdad conversion and change its ways, swapping its pre-war unilateralism for postwar multilateralism? No, says one Washington official. Collective ways of doing business are a matter of "convenience, not conviction" for the administration. They'll use the Geneva convention or the UN if it suits their interests, he says, but drop them the moment they stand in their way.  Why? Because the hawks in this administration believe in unilateralism as a matter of ideological faith. This is not a game or a debating position: they are deadly serious. Witness hawkish outriders like David Frum and Richard Perle calling for the burial of the UN once and for all, to be replaced by a new world order in which America gets a free hand. See Monday's editorial in the ultra-conservative Wall Street Journal: "Au revoir, security council."  Or take one more striking, practical illustration. In the months before war a debate raged in the Pentagon between, crudely put, the uniforms and the suits. The soldiers wanted more time, so they could build up to the 250,000 troops that would constitute the "overwhelming force" believed since the first Gulf war to be the best way to deploy US power. They wanted another month. But the Pentagon civilians, led by Defence Secretary Rumsfeld, insisted on going earlier, with many fewer men.   Why would a hawk like Rumsfeld prefer less to more? My Washington source offers an astonishing explanation: "So they can do it again." The logic is simple. Rumsfeld and co know that amassing an army of quarter of a million is a once-a-decade affair: 1991 and 2003. But if they can prove that victory is possible with a lighter, more nimble force, assembled rapidly - then why not repeat the trick? "This is just the beginning," an administration official told the New York Times this week. "I would not rule out the same sequence of events for Iran and North Korea as for Iraq."  So Washington may be regretting its hasty shredding of international custom - some of those rules could have come in handy in this war - but the pangs will fade. After all, this is a band of men with big dreams - and work to do.