Who needs the late-night, beard-and-sweaters brigade of the Open University? This week regular, pre-midnight television has been offering a highly educational course of its own. Spread across several evenings, it's been asking one of the perennial political, and human, questions: what makes a great leader? We've had Nelson Mandela on Wednesday, Margaret Thatcher on Thursday and Winston Churchill last night, as part of Andrew Roberts' TV seminar, Secrets of Leadership. And scattered throughout the schedule has been what OU lecturers might call a "contemporary module": examples of leadership practice from the here and now, with Tony Blair, George Bush, Jacques Chirac and even Saddam Hussein teaching their own, unwitting masterclass in the art. What emerges from both the past and former group is a veritable step-by-step guide for the would-be leader:   As with every quality on the list, the extreme exemplar is Mandela, who had the physical stamina to withstand 27 years on Robben Island, including long stretches of hard, stone-breaking labour. But all stand-out leaders have astonishing reserves of energy. Next week's episode of ITV1's Thatcher biography sees her former PA recall the PM's preference for whisky and soda, rather than gin and tonic, to keep her up all night during the Falklands war. Churchill worked much the same way (though champagne also got the old bulldog through the dark hours). Tony Blair has impressed visitors with his fitness and zip, under the most unrelenting pressure. Leaders of this ilk don't wilt under stress; they feed off it. A former cabinet secretary recalls Thatcher's attitude to the arrival of a new set of papers, bringing another problem to solve. Far from sighing with overwork, "she'd grab at it". An exception to this rule might be the current US president. Bush is never in bed later than 11 - not even on September 11 - and sets aside whole chunks of the day for downtime: an hour for exercise, and a lunchbreak munching chicken salad and watching sports on TV.   Mandela never wavered in his determination to end apartheid, and could not be bought off with anything less. Churchill was convinced the appeasers were wrong and his certainty was rewarded with the keys to No 10. But such self-belief can be a mixed blessing. In the Falklands war, Thatcher was determined to go to war despite pressure from a Republican White House to give diplomacy one last chance (and they say nothing changes). Her obstinacy paid off with a famous military victory and an election landslide a year later. Eventually, though, that same overweening faith in her own instincts would lead to her downfall. "She'd been successful," says Geoffrey Howe now. "And that can make a leader intolerant of dissent and overconfident in their judgment." Is that process, which took more than 11 years in Thatcher's case, now under way with Tony Blair? Aides say he has lost the hesitancy of his early years as PM: now he believes he has got it right so often, the key voice he should heed is his own. Whether future TV viewers will be told this was his greatest error, or the secret of his success, we should learn over the next few weeks.   Keep your friends close, and your enemies closer. So says the old saw, the one that's always quoted alongside, "Better to have them inside the tent pissing out, than outside the tent and pissing in." Churchill understood that logic, fighting Hitler with a coalition cabinet which ranged from the pro-appeasement right to the Labour left: he even found room for the man he replaced, Neville Chamberlain. Thatcher began by following the rule too. In her first cabinet she was in a minority, outnumbered by "wets". The epitome of such inclusivity is Mandela. He and his ANC chums would have had every right to freeze out their old apartheid masters. Instead Mandela found a place for them. At his inauguration as president, he took the salute of a parade of white, bemedalled military chiefs - the very people who had inflicted such misery on him and his people. And, in the BBC biography's most moving sequence, he even came to cheer the Springboks - that bastion of Afrikanerdom - as they competed in rugby's world cup final. He even wore a Springbok jersey, "a white man's shirt", for the occasion. Tony Blair's daily decision-making is not quite of that emotional register, but his non-sacking of Clare Short is a nod toward inclusivity. According to the textbook, it could also be smart leadership.   Churchill and Mandela are the models, transforming themselves from mere politicians into human symbols. The hat, cane and cigar became motifs of British resistance against Nazism, while the very word "Mandela" served as apartheid's antonym. Thatcher did not do badly in this department, her handbag briefly seen as an iconic bulwark against European federalism. In the current crisis, it is the leaders outside Britain who are coming closest to achieving such exalted status. Baffling as it may seem to outsiders, Americans have viewed George Bush with respect since 9/11, believing that he represents fairly well their determination to see off any threat. We can guess what most Iraqis think of Saddam Hussein, but many in the Arab world have long regarded him as the embodiment of the struggle to resist US domination. Still, the clear winner in this contest has to be Jacques Chirac. Twice in less than a year he has come to represent all France. In 2002's presidential election, he won the support of everyone bar the far right, as the Stop Le Pen candidate. And now he leads a French mood united against war. The only leader to miss out? Tony Blair. He wins points for political bravery, daring to be completely at odds with public opinion, and for obstinacy - but as a national figurehead, just now Clare Short is nearer the mark.   The only note of criticism in the Mandela film came from a South African Aids campaigner. Mandela does plenty now to raise HIV awareness, said Judge Edwin Cameron, but he did all too little as president. He didn't realise that, with apartheid ended, a new enemy loomed. "He didn't face up to it," says Cameron. The best leaders are always fighting the new war, not the last one. Churchill understood that, spotting the emerging German threat and the new means - airpower - that would be needed to combat it. What of today? Blair sometimes seems to be refighting 1999's Kosovo war, believing that moral arguments for intervention will win over a sceptical public and bring a rapid, relatively easy liberation. Meanwhile, Bush's whole pursuit of Iraq can seem like a literal case of fighting the last war - a settling of scores left over from his father's presidency. Others wonder if both Bush and Blair are not missing the real, present danger - al-Qaida - focusing instead on a much more traditional one from the past. Blair says the opposite: that the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling into terrorist hands represents the new menace. Perhaps he is right, and history will remember him as a 21st-century Churchill who saw the threat before anyone else. Or maybe this will be his big mistake, the one that consigns him to history's B-list. And no one makes TV documentaries about them.