We're all so fixated with the Middle East war that's about to begin, we've stopped looking at the one that never seems to end. But the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis has not disappeared just because we're no longer paying attention. It's still pressing on, stealing lives and breaking hearts every single day. In the last couple of months alone, Israel has killed more than 150 Palestinians - dozens in the last fortnight. In the same period, Palestinians have made more than 100 attempts on Israeli civilian lives; all failed, until last week's Haifa bus bombing, which killed 17. Take yesterday as a random, typical day in the life of the conflict. Israel killed three Palestinians in Gaza, discovering the bodies of two of them next to knapsacks containing pipe bombs. Meanwhile, an Israeli soldier was killed while on patrol in Hebron. Each side will find it easy to dismiss the deaths of the other: those two men were "terrorists," that one was an "occupier". But they were all people and now they are dead.  So what's been going in this most wearily protracted of conflicts while the world's been looking the other way? And what impact might the coming war on Iraq have on the long-running one between Israel and Palestine?  The first answer is plenty. Israel has a new government, for one thing. The heart of it is still Ariel Sharon, though with his Likud bloc now much expanded and joined by some new partners. Internally, this new coalition may actually bring some much-needed progressive reform to the country: for the first time in decades the ultra-orthodox parties are not in government, handing the militantly anti-clerical Shinui party a rare chance to separate religion and state.  Externally, there's much less cause for optimism. Sharon's new government includes two hard right parties, ideologically set against any compromise with the Palestinians. And the new administration's first acts have hardly been encouraging. Where once Israel made only brief raids into Gaza - targeting a suspected terrorist here, bombing a Hamas building there - now they seem to be digging in.  There are a clutch of explanations for this new, entrenched push into Gaza. First, Israel believes last year's reoccupation of Palestinian cities in the West Bank worked, at least slowing the rush of suicide bombers able to make it into Israel: now they want to repeat the process in Gaza. Second, the slight brake represented by Labour in the last, "national unity" government is absent now; Sharon and his hawkish defence minister, Shaul Mofaz, have a free hand. Third, Israel's near-complete destruction of Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority has left a vacuum. Arafat still wants to be seen making the national decisions, most recently appointing PLO veteran Abu Mazen as his prime minister, but the PLO is not the dominant force it once was. "It's Hamas that controls the streets now," says one Israeli government official. "The PA is not shutting Hamas down, so we're having to do it."  There's one more reason why Israel's doing this now: because it can. Attention is not on Israel - we're all glued to those pictures of the security council instead - so it's a good moment to get any unpleasantness out of the way. There's no reason to wait till the shooting war itself, say Israeli sources, because any attack on Iraq might be very short - perhaps the Middle East's second Six Day war. Instead the window of opportunity is open right now.  That's especially true because the US is in no mood to hold Israel back. Washington needs Sharon to follow the policy of "restraint" exercised by his predecessor, Yitzhak Shamir, during the last Gulf war: even when Iraq's Scuds landed on Tel Aviv, Shamir did not hit back. This time round Saddam might deploy the Samson option, deciding that if he's going to die he might as well bring the temple down with him - by hurling a few chemical weapons at Israel. Even with that provocation, Bush wants Sharon to sit tight rather than weighing in to what would fast become a regional conflagration. European diplomats believe that such is the need to keep Sharon on side, that Washington will say nothing to rile him in advance of war.  What about afterwards? How will an American victory in Iraq affect the Israel-Palestine conflict? It turns out that this is one of those intriguing questions that only the ill-informed pretend to know the firm answer to. Everyone else admits it could go either way - with a pile of evidence supporting two quite opposite scenarios.  The first imagines swift success in Iraq, leaving the US feeling pumped and under no obligation to anyone. European and moderate Arab whining about the need to pressure Israel into a peace process would be waved aside: after all, America would owe nothing to anyone. "The US could tell everyone to get stuffed - including Tony," says one Israeli official. The British PM, so vital now during the diplomatic endgame, would no longer have much leverage. Instead Washington's hawks could claim vindication for the conviction that underpins their approach to the war on terror: that the only way to fight fire is with fire - the same philosophy advocated by Sharon. The hard right view of all peace processes - that they amount to little more than appeasement and the rewarding of terror - would be in the ascendant. Washington would also have a pragmatic reason to indulge, rather than lean on, Sharon: the 2004 presidential election cycle begins in the autumn of this year. No White House wants to immerse itself in such a thankless task as Middle East peace-brokering in a campaign year.  None of this, incidentally, is meant to endorse the more lurid fantasising that has appeared in some European commentary, suggesting not only that a post-victory US would go easy on Sharon but that somehow the very purpose of a war on Iraq is the furthering of Israel's interests. That kind of talk, coupled with the pointed and constant lingering on the names of Bush's Jewish advisers - Wolfowitz, Perle - etc is not that far from the age-old anti-semitic claim, raised before every major conflict, that "it's the Jews who are dragging us into this war". Rest assured, the US right has plenty of reasons of its own for wanting this fight.  Indeed, there's at least some reason to believe that Bush Jnr will follow the precedent of his father: flush from victory in the Gulf, George Bush Snr convened a Middle East peace conference in Madrid - and pressed a rightwing Israeli PM to attend. If the Gulf war of 2003 is slow and tricky, and America realises it needs allies, it might well have to heed the demand of Blair and the Europeans and start knocking Israeli and Palestinian heads together this time too. That might not be as much of a leap for Bush as it seems: after all he has already publicly committed himself to a viable Palestinian state - the first US president to do so.  So the impact the conflict will have on Israel and Palestine will depend on two things: how the war goes and what Bush truly believes. The trouble is, no one can know either for certain.