By rights, I should be for this war. I am instinctively pro-American, if not pro-Bush. I care enough about the security of Israel to back the removal of a regime which rained missiles down on that country little more than a decade ago. I am not against military interventions per se and believe that US power can sometimes be a force for good in the world: that's why I supported the Kosovo campaign of 1999. Even my prejudices draw me to the pro-war side. When I see Tony Blair alongside Jacques Chirac, I find myself drawn to Blair's brand of conviction politics - his willingness to defend an unpopular cause - rather than to Chirac's self-interested calculation which, you just know, will see France sink its nose into the Iraqi trough the instant there's a sniff of oil profits to be had.  So I should be a natural recruit to the pro-war camp. The trouble is, most of the pro-war arguments remain so painfully thin. First, Blair says we have to get Saddam before he gets us. But the evidence of Iraqi aggression beyond its borders has been slim to non-existent for more than 12 years: the US and its allies have confined the Iraqi dictator to his cage.  Today Colin Powell will try to firm up the second, related argument, that Saddam may not strike at us himself, but he is arming the fanatics of al-Qaida to do so. This pairing of Saddam and Osama is like a love match between the Pope and Kylie - one of those relationships that is theoretically possible but remains unproven and unlikely. Maybe Powell's evidence will change our minds; until then, sceptics can wonder why Washington waited till now to reveal it.  But if those arguments don't convince, there are a couple more which should fare better. The first is the humanitarian case, which says that Iraqis lead miserable lives and are desperate to be freed from a murderous tyrant. That cannot be in dispute, but much that flows from it is. Will the price of this "liberation" be too high, in the form, first, of mass Iraqi casualties and, second, a long-run occupation by a foreign power? Are we eroding yet further the notion of state sovereignty, by not merely intervening in a contested province of a country - as Nato did in Kosovo - but changing fundamentally the make-up of the country itself? Perhaps these objections could be overcome if humanitarianism was the driving motive of the coming war on Iraq, as it was in the Balkans. But it is not.  Still, respectable defences of the coming conflict do not run out there. The most plausible argument, championed by US liberals, centres on the beneficial   effect for the wider Middle East of a new, democratic Iraq. Thomas Friedman of the New York Times has written that the prospect of Iraq as a "progressive model" for the region is the only "morally and strategically justifiable reason to support this war. The Bush team dare not invade Iraq simply to install a more friendly dictator to pump us oil. And it dare not simply disarm Iraq and then walk away from the nation-building task."  Here then is the ground where moderates hovering over the pro- or anti-war line need to be persuaded. If Friedman is right, then perhaps an attack on Iraq is legitimate. But, with a heavy heart, I fear he is wrong.  For one thing, it does not take a knee-jerk European leftie to cite the US track record as reason to doubt Friedman's Quiet American optimism. With Afghanistan only the most recent example, the US has repeatedly "walked away" after the fireworks are over - usually leaving Europeans and others to clear up the mess. In Somalia a decade ago, 18 US casualties were enough to send the Americans packing, while "nation-building" became a swear word. As for the US installing "a more friendly dictator," that has long been Washington's preferred modus operandi, from the Middle East to Latin America. It is almost a foreign policy doctrine: he may be a sonofabitch, but at least he's our sonofabitch. To assume that Iraq will be different is to make a historical leap of faith.  But, OK. Let's put history aside and believe that, this time, the US will be different. Let's say it really will try to establish Iraq as a democracy. Can that be done down the barrel of a gun? Is there not something in the very nature of self-government that suggests it cannot be imposed from outside, and certainly not by force on a country with no history of democracy?  Defenders of the war offer the Japan of 1945 as the textbook example. There a nation, crushed in war, transitioned peacefully from rule-by-emperor to parliamentary democracy: Baghdad could do the same. But historians of the period say the differences are too many to count - starting with the moral legitimacy the US occupation of Japan had in the eyes of both the world and even Japanese opinion. No such global consensus exists on Iraq.  Besides, the liberal dream of a remade, post-Saddam Middle East assumes that there is no other way to do it. It makes war the first resort rather than the last. In fact, if the US and its allies were so keen to spread democracy through the Arab world, there are countless moves they could make. The US gives aid to a whole clutch of unelected regimes: it could start tying that cash to democratic performance. It could turn to Egypt and say: "This year's cheque for $2bn is conditional on a free press and an independent judiciary. Next year, no money unless you hold real elections." Why not use that   method to make Egypt the "progressive model for the whole region"?  Which leaves us with David Owen's hope, aired on these pages yesterday, that a war in the Gulf might lead to peace in the Middle East. Unfortunately, that hope seems to rest on two shaky premises. First, it suggests that Israel is holding on to the occupied territories as some sort of strategic buffer, to protect it against foreign threat. If the threat from Iraq is gone, runs the argument, then Israel won't need the buffer and will give it up. But, as the Scuds of 1991 proved, the West Bank does not work as a barrier. Thanks to missile technology, Tel Aviv is within reach of enemy fire even when Israel holds onto the occupied territories. No, security is not the chief reason why the Israeli right wants to keep hold of those lands - it's a more complex brew than that - so a change in Iraq won't   bring a breakthrough on that score.  The second, wobbly premise is its misreading of Washington. The first Bush administration was filled with "realists" who understood the need for a Palestinian-Israeli accord and were ready to pressure Israel to get it. But today's Bush team is not made up of James Bakers: if it were they could have demanded peace moves now, without going to war. Instead, the administration includes several men of Likud sympathies, whose likeliest reaction to victory in Baghdad is not going to be a request to Israel to give up land - but rather a determination to make the Arabs understand the new reality.  So, much as I might like to cross sides, I'm afraid I can't. I still don't believe in this war.