They were talking television in Tehran yesterday. In a hot, occasionally steamy, session in the Iranian parliament, lawmakers fought long and hard over whether sex, pop videos and international news should be allowed to penetrate the Islamic republic via the "alien capitalist waves" of satellite TV. The hardliners condemned the idea as the "legalisation of sin", debauchery beamed direct into Iranian homes. "Many corrupt deeds [already] take place in secret," insisted conservative MP Mohammad Razavi. "There is no reason for us to make it even easier for people to sin." But guess what? The hardliners didn't win. The reformers carried the vote, approving a bill to lift restrictions on satellite TV. Porn and "anti-Iranian" material will still be jammed, but otherwise the airwaves will be set free. If the parliament has its way, the dishes Tehranis have long hidden under tarpaulins or disguised as rooftop air-conditioning units are about to face the world.  Except that's a big if. Neither parliament nor the reformist president, Mohammad Khatami, have the last word in Iran. On the contrary, a serious power struggle is under way with Khatami under such pressure from the hardliners, including supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, that some predict he could soon be forced to resign. Allowing VH1's Classic Rock channel and a bit of Animal Planet might not sound like much, but in Iran that probably counts as a Khatami bid for the people's votes.  What does any of this have to do with us? In a week when our prime minister has been playing host to a different kind of Muslim leader, the answer is: plenty. For what a comparison of Britain's, and the wider west's, treatment of Iran and Syria reveals is an approach to the Muslim world that is confused at best. At worst it's hypocritical, self-serving and desperately wrong-headed.  If our leaders were serious about spreading democracy and human rights, they would know who to back and who to spurn. Reformers such as Khatami would get our vote: after all he has won a majority of Iranian votes not once but twice. He is a democratically elected leader in a region where they are in short supply. He believes authority rests in the people, an unfashionable view in a state that holds religion supreme. He even wants Iranians to face up to the failures of the 1979 Islamic revolution: "I accept there is a sort of hopelessness in our society."  But where is his invitation to Downing Street? Khatami, who needs all the help he can get as he takes on the ultra-conservative Iranian judiciary and council of guardians, better not sit by the phone. Now that George Bush has named Iran as one of the three charter members of the axis of evil, Blair could no more take tea with Khatami than he could spend the night smoking havanas with Saddam or take a train ride with Kim Jong-Il.  Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad, however, has been getting the full treatment: Downing Street photo op, complete with first ladies Cherie and Asma, on Monday, tea with the Queen yesterday. Yet how does Assad compare with Khatami? He certainly can't claim a democratic mandate. As a favourite Middle East joke puts it, what's the difference between Saddam and Assad? Answer: about 3%. (The Iraqi leader won his referendum by 100%; Assad scraped home with a measly 97.2%.)  His human rights record is truly appalling. Dissidents are still jailed including, earlier this year, two opposition MPs. And terror is not just reserved for Syria's citizens. The country occupies once-sovereign Lebanon and also hosts a clutch of terrorist organisations, including suicide bomb specialists Hamas and Islamic Jihad. Challenged on this point in his Downing Street press conference, Assad resorted to a defence straight from the Peter Foster Book of Truth-Telling. Those hooded men in armed camps aren't terrorists at all, the president insisted: they are press officers.  Defenders of the Assad visit say, "Of course, Syria is not the country we would like it to be, but it's better to engage in candid dialogue than to have no dialogue at all." That seems sensible enough, until you scratch away a little. First, this principle is applied with comic inconsistency. If dialogue is always best, why no London invite to Saddam Hussein? Why is he not getting a joint press conference and tea at Buck House? "There isn't all that much difference between Syria and Iraq," says Sami Zubaida, specialist in Middle East politics at Birkbeck College, London. Besides the safe harbour it offers the men of terror, Damascus is also developing its own biological and chemical weapons. Yet Assad gets the mulled wine and mince pies, while poor Saddam gets only the cold shoulder.  Also, dialogue is meaningless unless you're talking to the right people. Offering Iran trade and ties (as Britain and the EU have done, though not to the extent of offering a Syria-style official visit) makes sense because it aids the reformers in Iran, just as surely as America's confrontational, axis-of-evil stance reinforces the conservative mullahs (confirming their claim that the west is congenitally hostile to Islam, and that the only solution is to retreat from the world).  But who gets boosted by Assad's trip to Number 10? "Liberal forces are so weak and completely repressed in Syria, it's difficult to see how they can be reinforced from the outside," says Zubaida. The only victor is Assad himself.  It doesn't take a genius to work out why the Syrian dictator won his prize: it was a reward for voting the right way on Iraq in the UN security council. The US could not say thank you, so Blair did the deed instead - just the latest example of how international priorities are becoming warped by the determination to go to war with Baghdad. We fight Saddam instead of al-Qaida, and we reward despots instead of reformers.  This is not just wrong in principle: it's stupid strategy, too. If the west really does want to avoid a clash of civilisations, it cannot merely hope that Islamism will vanish as a political force. It has to look for an outward looking version of Islamism, one that might marry religion and democracy. Khatami seems to be in that business, as does the new Islamist governing party of Turkey. If the latter succeeds, transforming Turkey into a nation that honours, rather than tramples on, human rights, then the non-Muslim world should welcome it - starting with a place in the EU.  The message from the non-Muslim world to Muslim countries has to be consistent. Those nations that open up will be embraced, while repressive regimes and dictatorships will be shunned. If the west merely continues to play the same old power game - rewarding its interest-serving friends, no matter their crimes - then it will continue to fight the same old war. And it can only get bloodier.