Israeli governments are developing an unnatural lifespan. Like a breed of frail butterfly, they see out two summers and then die. Yesterday Ariel Sharon's administration joined those of predecessors Ehud Barak and Binyamin Netanyahu in failing to survive its full term. Less than two years after winning the premiership by the largest landslide in the country's history, Sharon has called elections for next February. Israel is about to endure three months of intense domestic politicking while the rest of the Middle East watches and waits. A peace process that was already in the deep freeze is now officially on hold. The instant conventional wisdom could not be less cheery. It declares that the timing of these polls is cynical, and that the only impact the eventual result will have on peace prospects will be negative. A victory for the rightwing Likud party is a done deal, says the consensus. The only interesting question is, who will be the beneficiary: Sharon or his arch-rival and newly appointed foreign minister, Bibi Netanyahu? The pair will spend this month duking it out in an internal leadership contest: whoever wins, says the received view, is a dead-cert to be the next PM.  The first part of that wisdom is right enough. The manoeuvrings behind these new elections have been all about political calculation. They were triggered when Labour's Binyamin "Fuad" Ben-Eliezer pulled out of Sharon's "national unity" coalition last week. Fuad feared that, if he stayed inside the government, he would forever be seen as Sharon Lite. Why would voters want him when they could opt for the real thing? Labour had to carve its own distinct niche before it was too late.  Sharon could have carried on without Labour, but that would have left him leading a far right coalition that would have strained Israel's relations with its chief ally, the United States - and wrought havoc with Israel's image in the rest of the world. Such a government may even have turned off the centrist voters Sharon needs to keep power.  So much for the plotting. What of the second certainty: that the result of this election is foretold? It certainly looks that way. Polls show Likud surging ahead as the largest single party in the next knesset, with Labour reduced to a rump. Adding the minor parties, some predict a right-left breakdown of 70-50 in the 120-seat parliament.  The explanation is simple enough: Labour and its left allies are associated with the peace process and, in the Israel of 2002, there is no more tainted brand.  Majority opinion holds that Labour's Barak tried negotiations in 2000 - offering Yasser Arafat a better deal than any other in history - and that the Palestinian response was an intifada and two-year wave of terror. Only what the Israelis call a  freyer, a sucker, would try that again.  But the left should not give up just yet. There are three months to play with: Labour and its allies could use every minute of that time to defy fate and work to pull off what would, admittedly, be a political miracle.  First, they need to get the right candidate. They, like Likud, have primaries this month, reaching their climax on November 19. Fuad faces two challengers. Leading the field is Amram Mitzna, current mayor of Haifa and a former army commander in the West Bank. He surely represents Labour's best hope, armed with the must-have qualification of any top-flight Israeli politician: a past in uniform. As both Yitzhak Rabin and Ehud Barak proved, any would-be Israeli dove needs the credentials of a hawk.  Mitzna certainly excites the peace camp, promising new talks with the Palestinians and a pullout from the occupied territories, either as part of a negotiated deal or, if that fails, unilaterally. But, despite his poll lead, the left needs to work extra hard if Mitzna is to win the Labour leadership. For a start, they have to unite behind him fast: at present, dovish votes are split between him and a third contender, Haim Ramon. Then they need to organise furiously. Fuad currently controls the party machine, so only a Mitzna groundswell will be enough to assure victory.   T hat done, the left must take full advantage of the current situation. For the next three months, Israel will be led by the most rightwing government in the nation's history, starring Sharon, Bibi and the ultra-nationalist new defence minister, Shaul Mofaz. With the first two engaged in a Dutch auction on the right, each battling to win the hearts of the hawkish Likud selectorate, Labour should use this period as a 12-week infomercial, advertising the true nature of the Israeli right. That should at least galvanise Labour's base, but it may also turn moderate floating voters off Likud.  If the party chooses Bibi, that task will be made even easier. Incredible as it may seem to outsiders, there are many Israelis who can live with Sharon - whom they see as responsible and relatively restrained - but cannot stomach Netanyahu. They regard him as extreme and personally untrustworthy.  Once battle is fully joined, Labour needs to recall what is the first commandment of electoral combat in most countries: it's the economy, stupid. By January, Sharon's austerity budget will be kicking in, cutting payments to pensioners, the unemployed and the disabled. Labour is already stronger with those constituencies, but it has too often failed to press home its advantage; in evitable, perhaps, in a democracy where war and peace trump all other issues.  But if the left can make the election a referendum on Sharon's record of double-digit inflation and unemployment, they might make progress. Of course, Israelis link the current economic malaise with the security situation. They're right: investors are staying away along with the tourists. But Labour can make that fact work for its own cause, arguing that it's in Israel's own desperate economic self-interest to re-open a political track with the Palestinians. There is a populist button to press too: why, when so many Israeli pensioners and workers are suffering, is Ariel Sharon funnelling so much cash to the Jewish settlers on the West Bank and Gaza? Peace and economics can become two sides of a valuable coin.  There is one last piece to this potential Labour game-plan. Sharon's election in   2001 was so comfortable in part because Israel's one million Arab voters stayed home. This time, as Israel returns to its old parliamentary voting system, rather than directly electing its PM, Israeli Arabs may well take part once more: they have several of their own political parties which they will want to see represented in the new knesset. They may not form part of a Labour coalition, but they could at least be part of a left bloc.  Of course, the biggest help would be a dramatic change in the wider landscape. If the Palestinians were to move; if, say, Yasser Arafat was to take the backseat role the US is urging on him, Israelis would suddenly find the idea of peace talks a whole lot more appealing. But the Israeli left cannot wait for that kind of miracle: it has to make one of its own.