Maybe the killer knew nothing of the president's diary. Maybe the suicide bomber who stepped on to the 32A bus to Jerusalem yesterday morning was thinking only of the men, women and schoolchildren he wanted to murder. But his handlers, those who turned him into a human bomb, would certainly have had one eye on the political calendar. They would have decided that now was the right moment to strike, just as there was a chance - a threat, in their eyes - of movement in the long-static search for peace in the Middle East. That is their pattern: if so much as a glimmer of hope appears, they kill and maim in order to snuff it out. They do not want a peace process; they want a war process. The glimmer this time was a long-awaited speech from George Bush. He was expected to unveil a new US peace plan, centred on a call for the establishment of a provisional Palestinian state, some time this week. But the talk last night was of delay. How could the president appear on the TV news promising a state of Palestine alongside pictures of 19 Israeli civilians blown to pieces? He would be breaking his own golden rule, appearing to reward terror. No, he could not make a gesture to the Palestinians so soon after a Palestinian killer had wrought bloody havoc.  So the Hamas hardmen may well have wielded their now-familiar veto. They have a proven talent for stopping progress before it has started and, if they provoke the fierce Israeli response they want - fresh incursions into Palestinian cities, including a new assault on Yasser Arafat - they will have done their job once more.  But Bush will reach his White House lectern eventually. When he does, what will he say? And will it be enough? Advance leaks suggest the president will recommend the creation of a provisional state of Palestine, with temporary borders and limited sovereignty. Its terrain would probably consist of the Gaza Strip and about 40% of the West Bank, areas that are already meant to be under the total or partial control of Arafat's Palestinian Authority. The new Palestine would get a full seat at the United Nations, win global recognition and then negotiate with Israel as a state - rather than as a stateless people. Diplomats say the idea is not Washington's alone but has the backing of London and Berlin.  Don't expect a wave of grateful delight to sweep across the West Bank just yet. Ariel Sharon, of all people, captured Palestinian feeling quite well yesterday. "It is interesting to know what kind of Palestinian state they mean," the Israeli prime minister said as he toured the wreckage of the Jerusalem bus bombing. "What Palestinian state are they talking about?"  That's what Palestinians want to know, too. If President Bush simply declares that the so-called Areas A and B already allocated to the Palestinians under the 1993 Oslo accords are now to be referred to as a state, they will be unimpressed. Worse, many will regard it as an actively negative development.  They fear that any temporary arrangement will rapidly become permanent, leaving Palestinians with a 40% mini-state in perpetuity. One Palestinian negotiator yesterday recalled the "Gaza first" plan of the Oslo years, soon mocked as "Gaza last" when subsequent handovers of land did not come. They do not want to take a little now and wait for a lot later. Their experience is that if you accept a little, a little is all you get.  There are other fears. This temporary plan presumes a process of gradual negotiation towards a final settlement. But that kind of incrementalism has been utterly discredited, Palestinians and peace-minded Israelis agree, by the Oslo process. That model was premised on a slow build-up of trust and went horribly wrong. Now, the parties insist, there has to be a rapid move towards the final resolution of the conflict, with all sides fully aware of where they're heading. If Bush's plan looks like another slow-burn Oslo, it can't work.  Even so, if George Bush makes the call for statehood, Yasser Arafat may still say yes. For one thing, it will be hard to say no to the word which has been a Palestinian rallying cry for decades. But, more importantly, it is an idea which could be made to work.    If Palestinians get more than the trinkets of statehood - including, say, sovereignty over borders and natural resources - Arafat would have something substantial to show his people. All peacemakers, wherever they are in the world, testify that an essential ingredient is the ability to point to gains that politics, rather than violence, can bring. If Arafat can show diplomacy has brought a real prize from the Americans, he can begin to win over the young men and women now rallying to the flags of Hamas and Islamic Jihad. This is probably what Cherie Blair meant when she stumbled into the Middle East minefield yesterday. "As long as young people feel they have got no hope but to blow themselves up, you are never going to make progress," she said. Meaningful statehood would be a way to fill that deficit of hope.  In the same spirit, the US has to offer a timeline for permanent, rather than temporary, statehood. If Palestinians believe this is a road that could wind on forever, they will not go down it. But if a one-year limit is set for negotiation, another for implementation (with longer for the full restitution of Palestinian refugees), then this plan could be a runner.  That will take the full involvement of the international community, with the "quartet" - the US, UN, EU and Russia - serving as a kind of steering committee. They will have to tell the parties that if no agreement is in place after a year, they will move to impose one. That will require diplomatic steel, a willingness to press the Israelis to dismantle Jewish settlements and Palestinians to swallow a painful compromise on the return of refugees.  Palestinian negotiator Nabil Sha'ath outlined a similar gameplan when he met the US secretary of state, Colin Powell, last week. Powell may have liked the idea, but it hardly matters. The State Department's relationship to Bush's White House is like that of a foreign government: it is listened to respectfully, but often ignored.  The people who matter are Bush and his inner circle. And that is the chief reason to welcome this move, whenever it comes. It could at last signal the arrival, however tentative, of White House engagement in this conflict. All sides recognise that they can do nothing without it, that any settlement will not come from the top down or the bottom up but, in the phrase of the hour, from "the outside in".  So the provisional statehood scheme may be incomplete and flawed but it has the potential to develop into something hopeful. And, in a conflict where deadlock and death have become the daily norm, the mere promise of diplomatic activity comes as a blessed relief.