It would be nice to think we had reached rock bottom. But everything you know about the Middle East steers you clear of such optimism: things can always get worse. They are desperately bad already. Israel is choking the West Bank with a force unseen in 35 years of occupation. Residential streets are deserted of people, filled instead with Israeli tanks and troops beating down doors, arresting men by the hundreds. The once-proud head office of the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah is a hammered ruin, with Yasser Arafat holed up inside - a prisoner living by candlelight and on Red Cross food rations. There are gunfights in Bethlehem, outside the Church of the Nativity.  The so-called Area A that was meant to ring-fence Palestinian-run chunks of the West Bank and Gaza, keeping them out of Israeli reach, is a dead letter: Ariel Sharon now sends his troops wherever he likes. This reoccupation is harsher than the old occupation ever was, with the UN now warning of a humanitarian crisis as Palestinians cry out for food and water.  The whole scene is a rerun of the 1982 siege of Beirut, with Sharon once again the cartoon cat chasing a tiny, infuriatingly indestructible mouse. Now, as then, he is training all his firepower on Arafat, though taking care not to pull the trigger. Twenty years ago the Tom-and-Jerry, Arik-and-Yasser stand-off ended with the Palestinian leader driven into exile. Yesterday Sharon signalled his aim has not changed. With chilling sarcasm, he said those worried for Arafat's safety were welcome to fly him out of the region - but only on a "one-way ticket".  Viewed from the other side, Israelis feel just as desperate. Every day, it seems, brings another suicide attack, if not two. Outsiders have failed to understand what this is doing to the Israeli psyche. The only way to get close is to imagine it happening here. Proportionally, it's as if 400 civilians were killed across Britain in the five days since Friday - 40 in London, 200 in Manchester, 160 in Glasgow.  Imagine that every time you went to Starbucks or Pret, attended a wedding or a disco, you knew that you could be about to die a violent death. People speak of Britain as a country that has some experience of terrorism. Let's be honest: even in the darkest days of the Troubles, there was never anything like this. So Israelis stay in their homes, too scared to venture outside. In this, if nothing else, Israelis and Palestinians now have something in common.  And the danger is spreading. Lebanese Hizbullah fighters yesterday   fired a Katyusha rocket into northern Israel - the first since Israel withdrew from Lebanon nearly two years ago. Street demonstrators in Jordan and Egypt are demanding their governments break off relations with Israel.  Even in faraway Europe, the weekend witnessed a wave of anti-Jewish attacks, attributed by police to youths "of Arab origin". In Marseille, Lyon, Strasbourg and Brussels synagogues were torched; in Toulouse a gunman opened fire on a kosher butcher shop. What began as a local war of Palestinians against Israelis risks becoming a global battle of Arab against Jew.  Caught in such a nightmare, the first task is to wake up. People who care for the peoples of the Middle East need to stir now to realise how dire the situation has become. They could wait for things to get worse - as they certainly will - but the alarm bells of conflagration are getting louder.  Right now it is hard to see any way out; the two sides look so completely paralysed. Yasser Arafat cannot stop the suicide bombings: the very security apparatus he would need for that job has been smashed to pieces by Israeli armour. Nor can he easily renounce terror: any speech he made from his shattered Ramallah compound calling for a ceasefire would have the visual grammar of a surrender under assault, bringing only condemnation from the new generation of militants who demand resistance. He cannot do it.  Israel cannot move either. Each new suicide attack convinces Sharon and a large section of Israeli public opinion that they have to hit the Palestinians back ever harder. What he and his supporters cannot grasp is that the very reverse is true: every new Israeli brutality, every house raided, every shell fired, recruits another suicide bomber - a young Palestinian so angered by the humiliation of his people that he, or she, resolves to wreak bloody vengeance.   A nd yet what both sides also fail to see is the strange paradox of the current situation - that even as the two peoples move deeper into war, the wider, diplomatic landscape around them is becoming more conducive to peace. Two shifts have occurred in the last month, both of momentous proportions. One should transform Israeli opinion, the other should do the same for the Palestinians.  Last week a summit of the Arab League in Beirut took the step that the Zionist movement has dreamed of for nearly a century: all 22 Arab states effectively recognised Israel and its right to exist. They did so by backing the Saudi offer to the Jewish state of "normal relations" in return for both withdrawal from the lands Israel occupied in 1967 and a "just solution" to the problem of the 3.8 million refugees created by Israel's birth in 1948.  Those are not absurd demands: indeed, a version of them was on the table and all but agreed at the Taba talks a little over a year ago. They will require major concessions by Israel: rescinding all of the West Bank, Gaza and the   Golan Heights will be painful for many Israelis. But the prize on offer cannot be underestimated. This represents more than the pair of treaties so far secured with Egypt and Jordan. This is acceptance by the entire Arab world - including Iraq and Libya! - of a Jewish state in their midst: the existential security Israelis have yearned for since the birth of their state more than 50 years ago.  The international environment has fundamentally altered for the Palestinians too. Last month the UN security council endorsed for the first time an independent Palestinian state, condemning Israel's "illegal occupation" of the territory where that state should stand. Resolutions like that come up all the time, but usually they are vetoed by the United States. This time the US not only voted for it: it proposed it.  The significance of that move cannot be exaggerated either. It means that 35   years of American indulgence of the Greater Israel project - by which Israel claimed the West Bank as the Judea and Samaria of its ancient birthright - is finally over. The game is up. One way or another, Israel will have to end its occupation and give back that land.  When the smoke of battle eventually clears, both sides will realise how much the landscape has changed - in their favour. Palestinians are currently so besieged they are barely in a position to do anything. But Israel's government could change course. It could end its futile and failed policy of violence to stop violence - which only makes Israel less secure, not more - and realise that a great breakthrough could be at hand. Don't wait for the smoke to clear to see the new landscape: clear the smoke now, before the landscape changes again. <BR>