On BBC TV's Room 101 on Monday, Alexei Sayle made an unusual selection for the scrapheap. Along with Cirque de Soleil and the abuse of disabled drivers' permits, the comedian also consigned to fiery oblivion the general public - on the grounds that they were useless, carping and never came up with anything positive. I beg to differ. When it comes to politics, the public often get it exactly right. On the current debate on Iraq and America, for example, the electorate is bang on.  Look at yesterday's ICM/Guardian poll. A clear majority, 51%, oppose British backing for a US assault on Iraq, with only 35% in favour. (Intriguingly, the most hawkish are Labour voters, with 43% approving military action - a couple of points ahead of those hippy, peacenik pinkos who identify themselves as Conservatives.)  Glance next at one of those more general surveys which ask people to rank their favourite countries. Guess who comes top? The United States, by a country mile. When the Observer asked Britons last year where else they would most like to live, one in five named America - rising to one in four among the under-24s. For the public, these two views are wholly compatible. They are against America's plans for Baghdad but pro-America - all at the same time. No problem.  Yet, for some reason, this same feat of choreography seems to elude some of our finest thinkers and debaters. For them, you either support everything or you support nothing. If you oppose the policies of George W, then you are a vicious anti-American. Conversely, if you praise American values, then you're an apologist for every US excess - or inconsistent for failing to support every Washington action. Believe me, this either/or binary system really does apply: I have the email avalanches to prove it.  So today I issue a plea, in defence of that little sliver of middle ground where I - and, apparently a good chunk of the public - want to stand. We want to be pro-America and anti-Bush. We want to applaud what the United States stands for, even as we express our dislike for this particular administration.  This should not be brain surgery. No great intellectual agility is required to laud the founding ideals of the American republic while simultaneously lambasting Washington's current masters. You can admire the 1787 declaration that we, the people should be sovereign - and still insist that bombing Iraq is not the best way to get at Saddam's weapons of mass destruction. No contradiction.  You can love the radical breakthrough represented by the US constitution, which codified and entrenched human rights in plain, accessible language - and still fear that the military pounding of Afghanistan was not the right way to disable the global network of al-Qaida, now active in an estimated 59 other countries. No contradiction. Or you can marvel at the energy, can-do creativity and diversity of American society, much of it the fruit of the unique US constitutional set-up - and still lament the bellicose clumsiness of a phrase like "axis of evil". No contradiction.  Yet somehow this simple piece of footwork seems too tricky for some people. Condemn those three Bush actions, and you will be branded a "socialist European faggot" with a twisted hatred of the US (I'm quoting my email pals).  That's at one end of the spectrum. But the other end appears similarly trapped. Recent converts to the glories of the founding American idea seem to think they have to back the government because they admire the society. The group Tariq Ali brilliantly described on this page as the belligerati - Martin Amis, Salman Rushdie et al - have let their enthusiasm for the US culture of rights, democracy and innovation come over as a specific endorsement of current Bush strategy.   N o such move is necessary. A neater stance is the one adopted by more than half of US voters in November 2000 (another case of the public getting it right). It's fair to say all those Americans were pro-American, but they preferred the Al Gore/Bill Clinton version to the George W one. That's a legitimate position for outsiders, too: to admire the enduring US values of the 18th century but to prefer a centre-left hue for today's republic.  But, as if to prove that no one is immune to the trap of either/or binary thinking, Tariq Ali refuses such a possibility. For him, as much as for President Bush, you are either with America or against it. It is "a self-indulgence" he says, to want "Clinton-as-Caesar" since it is support for the empire itself which counts: who stands at the pinnacle is irrelevant.  That is flawed thinking on two counts. First, it plays to the worst kind of cynicism about democratic politics: that it doesn't matter who wins elections, they're all as bad as each other. In the case of recent US history, such a view is badly at odds with the evidence. Bill Clinton's military interventions in Haiti and Kosovo, like his tireless efforts to broker peace in Northern Ireland and the Middle East, were political choices which it is hard to imagine the Bush-Cheney team ever making. There is no monolithic American policy, but a variety: some you support, some you don't.  Which brings us to the second flaw in the blanket, anti-Americanism case. It only makes sense if somehow the cur rent gung-ho, Bush line is written into the very logic of the American revolution - so that support for the 1776 ideal commits you to support today's aggressive militarism.  But there is no such automatic, logical connection. There is nothing about the idea of a written constitution, or a system of checks and balances, or local democracy or an abundance of elections, which says anything about foreign policy. It is perfectly possible to imagine a US organised just the way the founders intended with a non-interventionist, pacific, stay-at-home view of the world.  More than just possible. Some of the founding fathers felt exactly that way: no less than Thomas Jefferson declared at his inauguration that the new United States sought "peace, commerce, and honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none". Later John Quincy Adams would say America "goes not abroad in search of monsters to destroy".  Indeed, there has been a wide streak of isolationism running through US his tory, not always commendable: the wariness to join arms against Nazism remains the most ignoble example. It's worth remembering that even as recently as the 1991 Gulf war, senate support for military action came by only the narrowest margin.  So if one dislikes the unilateralism of George W Bush, then just remember the multilateralism of Woodrow Wilson and Franklyn Roosevelt which gave birth to the League of Nations and then the UN. There is no single US foreign policy creed, just competing traditions.  Today we ought to back the progressive legacy, combining it with praise for what Christopher Hitchens rightly calls the "great idea" of the American revolution. We may even want to see that revolution exported to those lands as yet unvisited by democracy. But the best method for the task remains a combination of peaceful persuasion, aid and example - not bombs. And it is hardly anti-American to say so. <BR><BR>