Tony Blair says we are all the Children of Abraham; Bill Clinton wraps up his speeches the same way. But for two men born on opposite sides of one of the world's bitterest divides, the phrase is more than a rhetorical flourish: it is their life's work. One is a Jew, the other an Arab, and together they dream of making 2002 the opposite of 2001 - if not a year of peace, then at least a year when Israelis and Palestinians at last sit down and listen to each other. For theirs is no ordinary peace movement; they are not in the business of lobbying politicians or holding demonstrations. They aim instead to change the minds of both warring nations one person at a time. Their strategy could not be simpler: they want to reach Israeli and Palestinian individuals, especially the children, and educate them out of hate.  To achieve that goal Muhammad Hurani and Amir Tadmor, both 49, are positively fizzing with ideas, waving about project proposals and funding applications. One plan calls for playgrounds in border areas between Jewish and Arab neighbourhoods, encouraging children to play together as friends rather than enemies in the making. Another wants to bring Israeli and Palestinian history teachers together - forcing each side to confront the wildly different versions of the past they convey to their children, and to work on a new, "common understanding" both nations might teach in the future.  Their plans are nothing if not ambitious. But Hurani and Tadmor, both veteran educators, make no apology for that. They are convinced that no peace can ever come until the mutual hatred between their peoples is tamed at its source. "The most important element of any peace process is changing people's minds," says Tadmor, his kindly, bearded face alight with conviction. "That means teaching and learning the narrative of the other, ending the stereotypes. And that can only be done at the grass roots."  Right now, all their hopes and plans are just that. The handful of peace-through-education schemes they began in the late-90s years of the Oslo process are now suspended; the rest exist only on paper. "In the past year, since the intifada, we've been paralysed," says Tadmor. Meeting has been physically impossible, the duo explain, thanks to severe Israeli restrictions on Palestinian movement around the occupied territories and a deepening atmosphere of suspicion, if not mortal fear. "The only interactivity between Israelis and Palestinians these days is shooting," says Tadmor with a bleak smile.  Yet the Children of Abraham refuse to give up. Even now, in the middle of what they both call "this nightmare", they are convinced their two nations will one day have to reach out and touch one another. And they are leading by example. For, despite 16 months of spiralling conflict, suicide bombings and targeted assassinations, Hurani and Tadmor remain tight, close friends. They constantly banter with each other in rapid-fire Hebrew, regularly clasping each other's arm or knee to emphasise a point. They even manage to spice their chat with laughter.  "It's a real friendship," says Hurani, every inch the academic in beard and tweed. "We are not Jew and Arab in this case, we are human beings." When the Palestinian lost his father recently, his Israeli friend was among the first to come and pay his respects. Tadmor admits he was shivering with fear as he drove from his Jerusalem neighbourhood to Hurani's village near Ramallah, through streets crowded with Palestinian youths. But even during the intifada, when few Israelis out of uniform dare cross into Palestinian towns inside the occupied territories, Tadmor was determined to do it. "When he came to me, I was so proud to have him, to let my friends and family know who he is," says Hurani. "It's so important, even with all this tragedy, to keep that personal warmth between us."  For both men, their friendship and Children of Abraham are just the latest steps in the long search for co-existence. Hurani is a senior lecturer at Israel's David Yellin College, a teacher-training institute with a uniquely mixed, Jewish-Arab student body. As one of the million-plus Israeli Arabs - Palestinians born inside Israel proper who hold Israeli citizenship - he lives his life on both sides of the divide. "I am in the middle, between my people and my state," he says. "I feel I am a Palestinian and I belong to the Palestinian people; but I am also an Israeli who was born in Israel."  Tadmor, too, has credentials in the coexistence business. A former diplomat who once served as spokesman to the slain former prime minister and peacemaker, Yitzhak Rabin, he spent the Oslo years trying to build economic bridges between Israel, Jordan, Egypt and the Palestinians. "But then came the assassination and then Netanyahu and I realised that Oslo had not addressed the most important element: education at the grass roots." He decided to create Children of Abraham; Hurani fast emerged as the natural partner.  Friends they might be now, but neither indulges in sugary platitudes of brotherhood, love and harmony. They admit they face enormous barriers - even between themselves. They have failed, for example, even to win over their own children to the cause. "My son yells at me when he hears Muhammad's voice on the phone," says Tadmor. "He says, 'You and your terrorist friends are killing us!'" Tadmor's son is 11 years old. Neither the boy nor his 16-year-old sister will walk with their father on the local promenade at Talpiot. "They say, 'There are too many Arabs there, we're afraid'."  "I know we need to work on this more," says Hurani, explaining why his three older children have no contact with Tadmor's two. "But it's not our decision. The kids need to make that decision, to come together or not, for themselves. In my 25 years of teaching, I've learned that children do have these hidden fears..." ("Not so hidden these days," interrupts Tadmor.) For Hurani, the suspicions are not so surprising, considering Israeli and Palestinian children are educated in separate schools under separate systems with separate books and taught separate accounts of the past, present and whole world.  The two men cannot conjure a simple bridge to cross this divide. They know that education is a fierce point of contention, even a battle front in the conflict - with Israelis accusing Arafat's Palestinian Authority of using textbooks which, at best, refuse to acknowledge the existence of Israel on their maps or, at worst, incite violence against it and its people. But, as if to prove the depth of the challenge they face, the two cannot even agree on the problem, let alone a solution.  "There  is incitement in Palestinian textbooks," insists Tadmor. "And there were summer camps in Gaza where kids were taught to throw grenades and girls were told to forget dolls and to throw stones instead. The Palestinian educational system was used as a tool for mobilisation against us, especially during the past year."  No, insists Tadmor's Palestinian friend. Some of the most offensive textbooks are holdovers from the days of Jordanian rule; the others were passed by the Israeli censor in the pre-Oslo years. Besides, Hurani says, "I could accept Amir's argument if we were talking about two independent societies. But there is no symmetry here. One has power, one does not have power. One occupies, the other is under occupation." The conversation, even between these two partners for peace, is rapidly descending into the argument their fellow countrymen have with each other every day.  So this is not easy work. Men like Hurani and Tadmor cannot simply hug and make things better. They face enormous obstacles. Their missions of "peace tourism", in which Palestinians visited Israel's key historic locations while Israelis journeyed to the Palestinian heartlands on the West Bank and Gaza, have been suspended. Few but the two of them long for Israeli textbooks that relate the most painful episode in Palestinian history - the naqba, or catastrophe, when so much of their land was lost in 1948 - and for Palestinian textbooks that teach the greatest tragedy of Jewish history, the Holocaust. Few others in the area yearn for a "curriculum that would give each side the chance to understand themselves and to understand the other". Instead, there is fear and suspicion, typified by the Palestinian teacher who - on the eve of one history-confronting seminar - pulled out, apparently under threats from fellow Palestinians ready to brand him a collaborator simply for meeting Israeli schoolteachers.  So Tadmor and Hurani are left itching to get back to work, waiting for the smallest move by the politicians that might give them the space to resume their task. Tadmor is certain that, eventually, the two sides will have to resume the peace talks that broke down at the start of 2001. Hurani, meanwhile, thinks of his son: a Palestinian doctor who rushed to help Israeli partygoers, injured when the ceiling collapsed on a wedding reception in Jerusalem last year. He got past his hidden fears, says Hurani, and that gives him hope. "In spite of all these things, we still have tomorrow. We still have the future." <B>