Before it became unpatriotic to say it, there were many devoted Democrats whose first reactions to September 11 included the nostalgic wish that Bill Clinton was still in the White House. They whispered to each other how much safer they would have felt with Clinton at the helm, rather than the untested, uncertain George W Bush. Now, few Americans admit to anything but full support for their president and his war against terrorism. But in the elite circles of foreign policy wonkery, a vestige of the old feeling lives on, applied not to Clinton himself but to one of the stars of his administration. For these insiders there is one man whose tough-as-nails, no-nonsense style could come in handy right now. They want to draft in Richard Holbrooke.  Known as the Raging Bull of US diplomacy, Holbrooke was the envoy who could justifiably claim to have brought peace to the Balkans. It was his round-the-clock cajoling, hectoring and bullying that finally yielded the peace accord signed in Dayton, Ohio, in 1995. As Clinton's US ambassador to the United Nations four years later, he played a pivotal role in the war for Kosovo - once again winning plaudits for taking on some of the toughest, most-feared men in the world. Small wonder that his admirers would love to see him do battle with the current menace: Osama bin Laden.  Instead, like his former boss, he is watching this conflict from the outside. He sits not in the State Department - where he was widely tipped to take over had Al Gore become president - nor in his former patch at the UN, but on the 29th floor of a swank, Manhattan office building. He has a corporate job now, in a biotech company partnered with George Soros. It's a perch with a splendid view of Central Park - but it doesn't quite seem big enough for Holbrooke's restless energy or legendary ambition.  Still, Holbrooke is refusing to sit out this new war. He has taken over as the joint leader of a new, high-powered task   force on terrorism whose membership reads like a roll of the best and brightest names in US policy-making, law enforcement, academe and business. Set up by the Council on Foreign Relations, Holbrooke's group includes a pair of Nobel prizewinners, two former heads of the CIA, an ex-chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and a clutch of big-name politicians (including the suddenly resurrected Newt Gingrich). Holbrooke is fizzing with ideas for defeating the new threat - firing off newspaper articles and notching up CNN appearances And when he speaks, people listen. So what would the man who twice humbled Slobodan Milosevic, and who helped bring calm to East Timor, do about al-Qaida?  The first task is clear, and Holbrooke sounds confident. "Bin Laden will be eliminated fairly soon because the box he's hiding in is getting smaller. And a lot of intelligence is going to come our way. Somebody is going to help find him - or he's going to get caught in a cave."  And once he's found? "I know most people would rather he be killed. I'd kinda prefer to deny him the martyr status of a heroic death. I would like to see him diminished by being brought into a witness chair and made to show what he's really like."  Wouldn't a trial be a propaganda gift to Bin Laden, handing him a globally televised platform? "It hasn't done any good for Milosevic; he's diminished. He's trying to cast himself as the martyred Serb, but it isn't working. He's being cut off; he's losing his temper; he's being petulant. It's belittling... With Bin Laden he'd no longer be in a setting of his own choosing - in a film he's carefully crafted and edited. Right now, he can present himself as the heroic guy in long, flowing robes. Let him be seen in regular clothes, as an ordinary human being, losing his temper and saying crazy, stupid things; calling Kofi Annan a criminal. Let people see him as a medieval, recidivist crank, which is what he is."  Still, Holbrooke knows the problem with his courtroom scenario. International courts don't have the death penalty (and few Americans want to see Bin Laden live much longer) and, Holbrooke   admits, it may be tricky to produce "a direct chain of evidence" linking him to September 11. That, he says, is why world leaders want Bin Laden dead rather than alive. "I use the word elimination because I will take Bin Laden in either form: captured or dead." He also wants the entire top layer of al-Qaida's leadership removed, and the strangulation of the financial network that has sustained it. For Holbrooke, the worst-case scenario would be a Bin Laden martyrdom that leaves his "skilled subordinates" alive and motivated to strike again. Those lieutenants have to be taken out, too. This job is about more than one man.  Even the successful decapitation of al-Qaida would not make Americans safe. "It may lead to some more last-ditch, fanatical, suicide bombings against symbolic targets." Terror, he says, will never totally vanish. "In our societies, as every Londoner knows, you can't avoid the bomb left at Victoria Station or Harrods."  And next time it will be worse. "The issue is nuclear. There's no question that the next generation of terrorists, rather than going for small, little dramas, will go for the big one. They now understand that the way to get the world's attention is not strapping bombs to themselves in a pizza parlour, but to do something so horrific it gets you into the Guinness Book of World Records for terrorism. That takes years to plan - and it will be nuclear."  If that's not chilling enough, the early soundings from his task force are alarming. The Nobel scientists on the team say that America is "completely unprepared" for a biological or chemical attack. "We simply don't understand the medical threat and don't have the skill" to deal with it, says Holbrooke, adding that the "sloppy" handling of the anthrax mailings proved that liaison between US police and health officials is "non-existent".  The ex-diplomat's immediate focus is Afghanistan. He faults the Bush administration for failing to plan for life after the Taliban: they should have contemplated that weeks ago. Now he has his own plan.  First, he wants the international community to impose a provisional government on Kabul, rather than waiting for the competing Afghan factions to do the job themselves. Next, he wants the UN to send about 3,000 international civil servants to set up an administrative structure "for a nation whose own trained personnel have been destroyed by almost 30 years of war, murders and exile". He would like to see some of the Afghan diaspora return to join the rebuilding effort until UN officials are ready to hand back power.  Finally, Holbrooke calls for a foreign security presence in Afghanistan: not a UN peacekeeping force - it takes too long - but a multinational force with a UN mandate, like the one in East Timor. To pre-empt charges of western conquest, the force should consist solely of Muslim nations: Turkey, joined perhaps by Morocco, Bangladesh and Jordan - with any US presence minimal and in the background.  Holbrooke has it all worked out, even if he has already run into some serious scepticism. One high-ranking British diplomat says: "It's a lovely theory, but the realities on the ground make it unlikely." The Northern Alliance is just too hostile to any outside role; the best the UN can do is persuade Afghans to form a broad-based government: imposition is not an option.  Holbrooke will not be deterred. He's keeping his eye on other failing states that could become "the next Afghanistan". He thinks the rich world has to move soon to assist Africa; "Nigeria could explode at any time". And he offers one last, unexpected weapon against terrorism.  "We have to reduce our dependence on foreign oil." At present, America can be held to ransom by the most unstable region in the world - all because it relies on oil. If Americans can wean themselves off gasoline, turning to the new, "hybrid" cars that consume so much less, then it will be safer. It's not a green thing, but a matter of national security. Jimmy Carter was mocked for saying that 20 years ago but, says Holbrooke, he was right.  And what about the new president - how's he doing? "That's a tough question," he says, inhaling. "He's doing much better than his critics expected," he says finally, reminding you that Richard Holbrooke may be a lifelong Democrat - but he's a diplomat first.