There hasn't been much good news since September 11, so we should probably seize on whatever crumb comes our way. A decent-sized morsel came this week with the visit to London of the PLO leader, Yasser Arafat - and the promise he picked up from Tony Blair. Granting the Palestinian leader a rare joint press conference, usually the preserve of a visiting head of government, the prime minister committed Britain not only to a Palestinian state but to making that state "viable". Palestinians were delighted. "Viable" is their word, used to rule out any future attempt to fob them off with an unworkable mini-homeland: a pocket Palestine. They say the flaw of previous peace efforts has been the unworkable shape of any future state -a swiss cheese, impossibly full of holes. Now they have America's closest international ally echoing their demands.  That's good news, and not only for Palestinians. Friends of Israel, who believe that country's best hope for security is peace, should welcome Blair's move - along with the clear signs that Washington is at last about to face up to its superpower responsibilities and start seeking a peace accord between Israelis and Palestinians.  Intervention from George Bush may be the spur that is needed. An odd lesson of recent history is that the only force capable of shifting a rightwing Israeli prime minister is a rightwing US president. The proof came a decade ago when Bush's father got locked in a stand-off with the then premier, Yitzhak Shamir. Bush snr, a Republican who had won office with few Jewish votes - and therefore had little to lose - refused to release $10bn of US loan guarantees unless Shamir agreed to halt the building of illegal Jewish settlements. Even as Israel's defenders officially denounced Bush snr, many on the Israeli left were quietly cheering: perhaps if they could not make the Israeli right see sense, Washington could.  Now we are poised for a re-run, with Bush jnr picking up where his father left off. Last time round, Shamir's alienation of Israel's best friend so angered the Israeli electorate they booted the PM from power. Now Sharon has angered Washington even more egregiously than Shamir, accusing Bush of acting like a latter-day Neville Chamberlain, with Israel as Czechoslavakia, offered up to appease terror. The tacit hope of the Israeli left is that voters, anxious not to lose their American protector, will sacrifice Sharon as swiftly as they despatched Shamir a decade ago.  So those hoping for a Palestinian-Israeli peace should support the latest noises from Blair and Bush. They can even applaud the reasoning. Clearly, both London and Washington are eager to rob Osama bin Laden of a key propaganda weapon - his claim to be Palestine's new champion. Bin Laden's smartest move in his video address last week was to wrap his frail, delicate frame in the Palestinian flag. By insisting that Americans would not sleep soundly until Palestinians could do the same, he transformed himself - at least in the view of the Arab and Muslim "street" - from murderous outlaw to defender of a dispossessed people.  By cosying up to Arafat, the US-led coalition hopes to dim that appeal - showing themselves to be Palestine's friends, too. On this one question at least, Blair, Bush and Bin Laden agree: the plight of the Palestinians is a hot-button issue across the Islamic world. Anyone who wants Muslim support has to press it.  Judged purely on the facts, that unlikely trio are correct. All the evidence, from polling to street demonstrations to editorials in the Arab press, shows that Muslims do indeed put Palestine at or near the top of the list of grievances that matter to them most.  The trouble is, they shouldn't. Of course Palestinians should care passionately about Israel pulling back from the territories it has occupied since 1967. Of course, Israelis should make the same demand. Without it, there can never be the just peace both sides crave. They both have a life-and-death stake in ending this bitter, wasteful conflict.  But for Muslims around the world to see this dispute as the central question in their lives makes no sense at all. An Israeli withdrawal from Gaza is essential for the dispossessed of Gaza - but how, exactly, will it transform the life of an unemployed youth in Morocco? A Palestinian capital in East Jerusalem is a fair goal for the Palestinians - but how, precisely, will it rescue Pakistan from military dictatorship? A new border between Israel and Palestine is essential for those two nations, but how will it stop the Muslims of Iraq, Syria, Iran, Libya, Egypt and Saudi Arabia living under brutal, repressive regimes? It will not.  And yet, this local, admittedly bitter dispute is constantly described - from John Pilger to the Foreign Office - as the "running sore" of the Middle East, as if it lay at the very heart of that region's troubles. Solve it and the rage Bin Laden has so adroitly exploited will recede. That flabby thinking is fast settling into received wisdom.  But it makes no sense. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict affects Palestinians and Israelis profoundly, but it does not begin to explain the dire state of today's Arab and Muslim world, nor why it has spent decades languishing in economic stagnation and political suffocation. The Saudi royal family does not behead criminals because of Israel; Syria did not slaughter thousands of its own people in 1982 because of Israel; Afghanistan is not in the dark ages because of Israel.  Of course, the governments of those countries would like their peoples to think precisely that - that Israel is the satanic force responsible for all their woes. "Don't look at us, with all our corruption and incompetence; it's Israel's fault!" has been the cry of rotting dictatorships from Algeria to Iran. That's why their state-controlled presses are full of cartoons that could come straight from the Nazi press of the 1930s. Check out the Steve Bell slot in Egypt's al-Ahali: a regular procession of hooked-nosed, fanged Jews, their hands dripping in blood.  In the absence of a free press, it's perhaps understandable that the people of those closed societies have fallen for this diversionary tactic by their rulers. But western liberals have no such excuse. We should know better than to fall prey to what amounts to a latter-day socialism of fools. When August Bebel first coined that phrase a century ago, he was urging German workers not to be duped into hating Jews when their real foe was capitalism. Today's brand of anti-Israelism risks becoming a new socialism of fools - blaming the Jewish state for the Islamic world's troubles, rather than the vast, structural malaise afflicting that region.  Progressives should not let up the pressure on Israel for a just settlement: two secure states, sharing Jerusalem as their capital. They should do that because it will bring justice to those two peoples and some symbolic balm to bruised Arab and Muslim pride. But it's a dangerous delusion to imagine such a breakthrough will address what the Muslim-American intellectual, Fareed Zakaria, calls "the political, economic and cultural collapse that lies at the roots of Arab rage". That is a task that will take decades, cost billions and demand tectonic change for hundreds of millions of people. There are no magic short cuts, not even via the holy land.