Suddenly even the sky is a threat. A passing plane, on a cloudless, sunny day might be just a plane - or it could be a missile, ready to rain down havoc. A short flight could be swift and easy - or it might end with you and your family herded into a huddle by knife-bearing men bent on killing themselves, you and many thousands beside. A skyscraper could be nothing more than a tall building - or it could be a target. I suspect that for most of the world's people, soaking up hour after hour of TV coverage, these were the true messages of Tuesday's macabre air show. Whatever the politics of the kamikaze hijackers, whatever lesson they were trying to teach the world, most of those watching will have been thinking first of the human story unfolding before them. They would have wondered what must it be like to be stuck in the top floors of a 110-storey building consumed by a fireball, knowing there is no chance of rescue? What was going through the minds of those 266 passengers and crew, conscious throughout their abduction, knowing they were hurtling to earth and the most gruesome of deaths?  I sense that - rather than the complex geo-politics of the Middle East - was the stuff of kitchen-table conversations and family phone calls late into Tuesday night. Their focus will have been on stories such as that of Barbara Olson, the Washington commentator who phoned her lawyer-husband from one of the hijacked planes, alerting him to the mid-air ambush - until the line went dead. Or the office worker at the World Trade Centre who called home to say he was trapped and wanted one last goodbye.  This may seem like sentimental, human interest fluff to the experts and analysts. But reactions like these are not secondary to the perpetrators' plans. They are their plans. This is what terrorism is for: to make us terrified.  September 11 will surely have done that, and not just in America. Across the world, people will now be scared to perform functions previously regarded as routine. Air travel will seem more frightening than at any time since the skyjacking days of the 1970s; those who work in iconic buildings in capital cities will feel edgy. The sky itself will be gazed at in wonder, but also in fear.  In this way, at least, Tuesday's killers have struck a blow against globalisation more potent even than their toppling of the twin totems of the World Trade Centre. Faith in easy, safe, jet travel - so crucial to shrinking our world - has vanished. People will want to stay where they are, to hunker down, away from danger. As Israelis have been feeling for the past year - scared to visit a vegetable market, shopping mall or pizzeria for fear of a suicide bomber - so all the people of the west will feel now.   Of course these anxieties will be keenest in America; it is hard to over- estimate how huge a blow this will be to that country. The loss of PanAm flight 103 caused deep, decade-long grief - and Tuesday was like four of those combined. The 1993 bombing of the World Trade Centre struck New York at its heart, but that was a failure and Tuesday was a grotesque success.  The 168 people killed at Oklahoma City were victims of what had been the worst terrorist attack in US history, stunning Americans. Yet Tuesday's death toll could be a hundred times higher. In other words, this was Oklahoma, Lockerbie, the World Trade Centre and every 70s hijacking - all of them national traumas - combined.  In search of a parallel of fitting scale, US politicians have been comparing this day of infamy with the last one: December 7 1941, when Japan bombed Pearl Harbour. But Tuesday's attack will, if anything, leave a deeper wound.  For one thing, it is almost certain that more lives have been lost. About 2,400 died at the Hawaii naval base; the combined death toll in New York and the Pentagon could stretch into five figures. Nothing like that number has been lost on American soil since the civil war of the 1860s, which endures as America's greatest trauma. The US's other major conflicts, including the second world war, took place far away. Now the battle is in America's front-yard.  Pearl Harbour may have been easier to bear for another reason, too: it was clear. The enemy was defined, a country that could be taken on and defeated in war. Once it was, the threat would be vanquished. September 11 is not like that. The foe is at once much smaller than Japan - a network of terrorists numbered in the hundreds or low thousands - and much larger: encompassing, potentially at least, all the enraged peoples of the dispossessed world. No war, no atom bomb, will still this enemy.  Americans will want to lash out, but where and at whom? None of the usual remedies will work. They could bomb Osama bin Laden's lairs in Afghanistan, but they know from experience that won't get him. It would merely recruit a thousand more volunteers to his murderous army. Americans can demand more money spent on the US military. But what use is that when even the Pentagon can be hit out of a clear blue sky? A missile defence umbrella could cost billions, but it is worthless if the threat comes not in missiles but passenger jets, raining down on earth.  Americans will insist on greater airport security. But serious checks on domestic air travel, body searches and X-ray machines, take time - and that means fewer flights. Would the airline companies tolerate that for long? For that matter, would Americans, whose families tend to be dispersed all over their vast country and who regard zipping around it as a basic right?   No, unlike Pearl Harbour this is an attack that suggests no straightforward response. Americans know they face a lethal adversary, but they cannot find him - and they know that to cut off his head is only to grow several more.  And there is one more cruel difference between now and 1941. Then, the Americans were led by Franklyn D Roosevelt. Today they turn for solace to George W Bush. Outsiders often miss one aspect of the role of the US president: to act not only as head of government but also as father of the nation, able to lead the people in moments of collective sorrow and panic. (Bill Clinton's gifts as mourner-in-chief after Oklahoma in 1995 played a big part in winning re-election.) Yet Bush's performance on Tuesday - first referring to the "folks" who had perpetrated this outrage and later giving a televised address that consisted of a robotic recitation from the tele-prompter - will give little comfort. (Americans will have found stern-faced Tony Blair much more reassuring). Even a Washington or Lincoln would have struggled to deal with this crisis. But today's Americans don't have a Washington; they have a W.  And so they are left with an ashen New York city, covered as if by a September snowfall. Ahead of them are almighty insurance bills, a tumbling stockmarket and a looming recession - all because of this act of malice directed at their heart. Whatever happens next, that act has won one success already. It has made Americans, and everyone else, fear their own world.