Dear George,I know things are getting a bit prickly for you over there just now - your first big crisis and all that. Don't worry about it, the first one's always the hardest. After that you get lots of grey hair, bags under your eyes and the pundits start calling you "seasoned" and "experienced". With me it was the formula one affair and Bernie Ecclestone; with you it's a spy plane and Jiang Zemin. Same thing, really. Anyway, I'm writing to let you know that you've always got a friend in London (take a look at the map: it's right of America, across the blue bit and just after Ireland). You'll have noticed that us Brits have been the only government in the world to take sides in this spy-plane row between you and China. Japan, the Philippines and all the rest are either saying nothing or using diplomatic language to stay well out of it. Not us. We've weighed right in behind you. Did you hear Robin Cook's remarks? No, I don't suppose you did. Anyway, he's our foreign secretary - kind of like your secretary of state. And he condemned Jiang's demand that you apologise for crashing into one of China's planes. He said it was "unrealistic". Cookie also agreed with your call for Beijing to send the 24 US servicemen home as soon as possible - and for China to give back your plane. So, as you can see, we're doing the time-honoured British thing - staunchly serving as America's ultra-loyal ally, forever at your side. I don't care that, once again, I'll be on my own - just like I was when you and I bombed Iraq together in February. The Europeans will criticise me, calling me America's poodle, Uncle Sam's lapdog. But I don't care: being your number one ally is a prize worth all kinds of humiliation. Just one thing. It would make life a tad easier for me, and for America's less faithful friends, if this whole alliance thing felt more like a two-way street. That means Washington standing with us, the way you want us to stand with Washington. Kyoto is what I have in mind. Last week you said you'd tear up that global agreement on climate change. Now, I'm afraid that didn't go down too well here - in Britain or in Europe. People are in no mood to be your friend when you won't play ball with the rest of us. We need a little so we can give a little. You bring America back into the fold on Kyoto, listen to us on Russia or national missile defence, and then we'll happily be your partner in facing down China. But you can't have it both ways. If you insist on America First, you'll end up being America Alone. Anyway, I've banged on long enough. All the best, George. And remember: not too many late nights - unless you want to look as knackered as me!Yours, Tony <B>Interactive guide</B>  <BR>How did the planes collide?<B>Cartoon</B><BR>  Steve Bell's view of the US-China spy plane row<B>What's going on?</B><BR>The issue explained