Who wins when a baby girl, just ten-months-old, is shot cleanly in the head? Who wins when the early morning is broken by the sound of a bomb? Who wins when the same city shudders from a second blast just a few hours later? Certainly not the Israelis, on the receiving end of that treatment yesterday. Not the family of Shalhavet Pass, who have lost a baby daughter. They may have chosen to live on the West Bank, in Hebron, a tiny enclave of 400 Jewish settlers surrounded by 120,000 Palestinians, but their daughter made no choice. As one Palestinian activist put it yesterday, she "was a baby who didn't even know she was a settler".  So the Pass family are not winners. Nor are the citizens of Israel proper - those who have avoided the risks taken by the 400 hardliners of Hebron. They do not live in the heart of occupied territory; they are not driven by ideology. Yet they, too, feel nervous wherever they walk: yesterday's car bomb was left outside a Jerusalem supermarket. Nowhere is safe. In today's Israel a simple bus ride is a gamble with fate. Passengers eye each other cautiously: what if that man, over there, has dynamite strapped to his chest and is about to blow?  So the Israelis are not winning. But are the Palestinians? The sniper who killed Shalhavet: did he gain something for his people or his cause? If so, what exactly? Six months to the day since this intifada began, it's time to ask: what good is coming from it? What is it for?  Palestinians themselves are beginning to ask that question. For they are the ones paying for the uprising which erupted last September - paying for it in their blood, their children and their livelihoods.  Just look at the death toll: more than 420 lives have been lost, but the overwhelming majority of them, 350, have been Palestinian - dozens of them kids. They have seen a 12-year-old boy, Muhammad al-Durrah, shot dead in his father's arms (just like Shalhavet). Each week another Palestinian infant is transformed into a "martyr".  Palestinian lives are made next to impossible. Every attack on Israel brings another clampdown: either the closure of the West Bank and Gaza, choking off economic life in the territories, or "internal closures", cutting off movement between Palestine's cities, towns and villages. The result, says the United Nations, is a Palestinian economy losing $11m a day.  But the biggest problem comes from the Israeli response to Palestinian gun   attacks. TV audiences around the world probably believe this intifada is like the last one, back in the late 1980s: a battle of an armed Israeli Goliath against hundreds of young, stone-throwing Palestinian Davids. The current uprising certainly began that way - but it's changed.  Now it is fought less by a mass movement than by an activist minority - using guns. The crack troops are the tanzim, Palestinian fighters who enjoy a half in, half out relationship with Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority. It is the tanzim who fire on Jewish settlements and on Israeli army positions. Theirs is a time-honoured, anti-colonial strategy - a guerrilla war designed to make the occupiers' lives so unbearable they eventually have no choice but to leave.  The problem is that, in the process, the tanzim are ruining the lives of their own people. For these fighters tend to use residential Palestinian neighbourhoods as their base, firing from building sites or hollowed-out ruins. The Israelis then hit back at the source of the fire, sending local people cowering into basements and back rooms to avoid getting hurt. The result is a surge in casualties among Palestinian families who are shooting no bullets - but live too close to those who do. The killing of baby Shalhavet is a case in point: Israelis immediately hit back, with machine-gun fire and shells, wounding 16 Palestinians including a three-year-old boy. That Arab toddler did not kill the Jewish baby, but he paid the price all the same.   Now a backlash is underway. As Suzanne Goldenberg reports today, a range of Palestinians, from the grassroots to the elite, is beginning to rebel against the gunmen who are drawing the Israelis' fire. "We don't want to be accused of opposing the intifada," Ahmed Orabi, a Palestinian resident of Al Bireh told the New York Times. "But there is no rationale for what these thugs are doing. Their actions are risking the safety of the whole neighbourhood."  And before you write Mr Orabi off as some unrepresentative moderate, note that the de facto commander of the uprising, Marwan Barghouti, has also condemned shootings from populated areas - while Hamas says the tanzim are driving Palestinians out of their own neighbourhoods. On a Palestinian radio talk show last month, one speaker warned that unless Arafat brought the young gunmen into line, West Bank residents would not only abandon their villages - they would emigrate altogether.  Besides this most practical cost, the intifada is hurting the Palestinians politically. Israeli public opinion, which was beginning to gird itself for enormous concessions to the Palestinians, hardens every day. Every attack on a Jewish civilian, every car bomb, makes an Israeli consensus to give up land, or to divide Jerusalem, more remote.  All this is prompting some serious second thoughts among Palestinian circles. Journalist Daoud Kuttab's website asks, "Where is all this leading to? Shouldn't we have accepted the Clinton ideas? Where does the return to 70s and 80s rhetoric get us? Are we entering into a dark tunnel without an end in sight?"  Some suggest changing the intifada into a non-violent, Gandhi-style rebellion, perhaps blasting Jewish settlements with Palestinian music or prayers for 24 hours a day - that would soon drive them away, says one activist. Others want to look again at that Clinton-brokered offer, rejected by Arafat last year.  Admittedly, that Camp David plan had deep flaws. The map of the putative Palestine was a swiss cheese, full of holes; and Israel did not accept that 3.7m Palestinian refugees should have the right to return, a move most Israelis believe would amount to national suicide. But the basis of a deal was there, especially in the beefed-up form on offer in January: the Palestinians could've built   on it. It would have paved the way for statehood and a share of Jerusalem, including Palestinian control over the Temple Mount or Haram al-Sharif.  So no wonder many Palestinians are looking back wistfully at that offer now. The naive among them think they can still have it, by restarting talks with Ariel Sharon and picking up where they left off. But Sharon is not the same as his predecessor, Ehud Barak: that deal is not on the table. And, with Bill Clinton gone, the Palestinians no longer have a US president obsessed with middle east peace: when they ring Washington now, they'll be lucky to get their call returned.  No, the Palestinian tragedy is to be locked into an uprising that is hurting them more than their enemy - guided by a leadership with a fateful talent for missing history's moment.