By now both Tony Blair and William Hague had hoped to welcome the president-elect as a friend and omen of good fortune. Mr Blair would love to have hosted an early Downing Street summit with President-elect Gore, where the two might have toasted yet another victory for the centre-left. Mr Hague would happily have trotted over to Austin to join the queue of foreign dignitaries introducing themselves to President-elect Bush - gently pointing Britain out on the map, just to prevent any confusion. Both would have hailed an American triumph as a good-luck charm for their own electoral contest next spring. But they, along with the rest of the world, have been denied so clear a sign. They have not been able to draw the instant lessons from America, or to open up the transatlantic trade in ideas, that usually follows a US election. Instead Britain's politicians have, like the American electorate, been in a state of suspended animation for three weeks - all analysis on hold.  Yet there is much to look at and much to learn. For this 22-day post-election battle in America has been at least as revealing as the 18-month election contest which preceded it. The paralysis has laid bare an ugly fact about the American right - one eerily echoed by conservatism's lead forces here in Britain. It is a feature that the left, both here and in America, ignores at its peril.  Throughout, the Republicans have behaved not as if they and the Democrats were locked in a uniquely close race - but as if their opponents were bafflingly and selfishly refusing to recognise a clear defeat. The constant calls on Gore to concede, to bow out gracefully, would make sense if the Democrat had transparently won fewer votes than Bush. But he didn't: he won 323,000 more votes nationally and may well have won more in Florida, the kingmaker state under America's electoral college system.  Yet since the morning after the election night before, Bush and his surrogates - most notably the silkily scary former secretary of state, James Baker - have acted as if Gore was a sore loser and a constitutional wrecker, refusing to bow to the democratic will. As if that will has ever been clear.  So Republicans repeat that there has been a count, a recount and a re-recount - and that Bush has been the winner each time. They choose not to mention that even on the votes that have been counted (and that's not all of   them) Bush's margin has been wildly different - and smaller - with each total, proving that the picture is not at all clear and needs sorting out.  There is an explanation for this tone, and for the constant claims that Gore is trying to "steal" the election, when all he asks for is a full and accurate count which he may well lose. It is that, fundamentally, Republicans don't believe that a Democrat like Gore belongs in power - no matter how many votes he gets.  That should be a shocking statement to make about a democracy, yet it is an accurate description of a wide vein in Republican thinking. The assumption, all too visible on the faces of Baker, Bush and would-be vice president and "transition" boss, Dick Cheney, is that they are Republicans and should therefore run the country - and who the hell is this man Gore to hold them up?  That is why the American right has resorted to the tactics of a virtual coup d'etat to install its candidate - and restore what it regards as the rightful order of things. It sent in a baying mob to surround the vote-counting room in Miami-Dade county last week - shouting and pounding away until the local officials were so intimidated they abandoned their recount only a fifth of the way through. It has welcomed an incomplete vote certified by a Florida official who just happens to be the co-chair of the Bush campaign in the state - the Cruella de Ville of Republican politics, Katherine Harris - and who deliberately excluded updated figures which boosted Gore. Nor does it mention that the result was formally sealed by Florida's governor, Bush's brother Jeb. If this was how Democrats won an election, Republicans would denounce it as a travesty - but because it restores the natural order of politics, by putting them back in the White House, they can't imagine how anyone could question it.   Those who dare are instantly condemned as illegitimate. When a Florida court found in Bush's favour, it was a triumph for the rule of law. But when the supreme court overturned that decision and ruled against Bush, the justices were trashed as a bunch of Democrat appointees who could not be trusted.  Here is the alarming echo for Britain. Last week saw a vicious attack on Britain's top soldier, Charles Guthrie, the chief of the defence staff, in the Daily Mail. The paper condemned him for failing to block Tony Blair's plan to commit 12,500 British troops to a future European rapid reaction force, using the most lurid language of partisan hostility - even accusing the general of harbouring a schoolboy's homoerotic crush on the PM.  For the Mail and its backers on the Tory right, Guthrie had become a legitimate political target because he serves under and had failed to thwart a Labour government. Blair rightly seized on the   assault, making it the theme of last week's Cabinet meeting, because it revealed more than an objection to Labour's defence policy. It was proof, said the PM, that the rightwing simply do not accept the legitimacy of his administration or of anyone who serves it. "For them it is an affront and an outrage that there is a Labour government at all," says one Downing Street aide.  Accordingly, the right will not only condemn those, like Guthrie, who work for a Labour administration, but support any attempt to unseat it: hence Mr Hague's praise for September's fuel protesters as "fine, upstanding citizens". In this, Britain's Conservatives are entirely in step with their American cousins.  For the presumption on both the British and US right is that they represent not just the natural party but the natural  order of government - and that any challenge to that dominance, no matter how democratic, is fundamen tally illegitimate. The occasional exception can be made, when the right screws up or disgraces itself: Watergate in America, sleaze here. An occasional charismatic figure of the left might slip through the net - a Kennedy or a Clinton, once a generation - but before too long the right chaps will be back in.  Bill Clinton suffered from this for eight years, besieged by a Republican right that flatly refused to accept him as president: a refusal which culminated in the impeachment effort of 1998-9. Gore is grappling with that same arrogance of presumed power right now - and so, in a quieter, less obvious way, is Mr Blair. The left needs to know this about its adversaries, on both sides of the Atlantic. But so does everyone else. For a refusal to accept the choice of the democratic majority is a refusal to accept democracy itself.    <B>Key document</B><BR>  Download the Florida supreme court ruling (pdf file)<B>Related stories</B><BR>Timeline - when will America decide?<BR>Election glossary<BR>Graphic: Know your chad<BR>  22 November: The chad debate - are dimples Gore's best hope?<B>Interactive</B><BR>  Results declared, state by state<B>Audio</B><BR>  Ed Vulliamy on Palm Beach (3mins 45)  <B>Local media</B>  <BR> Miami Herald<BR>Tallahassee Democrat<BR>Palm Beach Post<BR>Sun Sentinel  <B>Useful links</B><BR>  Florida supreme court<BR>The latest state of the count<BR>Arguments for and against reform<BR>Origins of the Electoral College<BR>How the system works<BR>A learned definition of chad <BR>Academic analysis of US voting systems<BR>US Federal Election Commission (FEC) <BR>FEC explanation of the punchcard ballot