Tomorrow is Thanksgiving in America, a day for families to gather together, carve the turkey, savour the cranberry sauce - and fight. For this annual feast, older than the republic itself, occupies much the same space in American national life as Christmas does in ours. It's the one time in the year when all work stops, when far-flung relatives hop on trains and planes so they can reunite, sit down and eat - and remember why they all chose to live so far away from each other in the first place.  The routine is familiar enough. The day begins with joy and hugs, but as the afternoon slides into a hazy, overfed evening, the cracks soon appear. Tense barbs are traded between sisters; long-ago resentments revived by brothers. Before too long, doors are slamming, mothers are sobbing and everyone is looking forward to catching the first flight home.  Or at least that's the stereotype, recycled in a hundred home-for-the-holidays movies. With that in mind, spare a thought for Jeb Bush, governor of Florida. His task this year was clear and simple: to deliver the sunshine state for his brother, George W. If he failed, W had joked it would be a "chilly Thanksgiving" around the Bush dinner table.  Since it's not clear if Jeb did the business for his bro or not, expect the atmosphere chez Bush to be pretty strained. The Bush clan will gather tomorrow uncertain if it is celebrating a victory or mourning a defeat, all thanks to the theatre of the absurd currently being played out on Jeb's hometurf. On election night, as the TV networks first claimed Florida for Gore, Jeb reportedly went over to W, hugged him and, with tears in his eyes, blubbed: "I'm really sorry, brother." Expect Dubya to get snippy if Jeb tries that again tomorrow.  The Gore household is bound to be equally tense. Tipper was never too keen on a presidential campaign in the first place, let alone one that went more than a fortnight into extra time. And there may well be sharp exchanges between Al, brother-in-law Frank and daughter, Karenna - both of whom were among the geniuses running the Gore campaign, turning what should have been a victory stroll for the vice president into a photo-finish.  But enough of the lead players, gnawing anxiously at their turkey tomorrow. What of the American people itself; what does their Thanksgiving hold in store?  At first glance, they seem set only to honour the late-afternoon part of the   tradition - by getting fractious and bitter with each other. A visit to the Palm Beach County recount centre last week offered a foretaste of the rancour to come. Bush supporters took delight in winding up their opponents, handing out placards that perfectly replicated the Democrats' Gore-Lieberman banners - except now they said Sore-Loserman. The Florida T-shirt and badge industry has been in overdrive, with slogans ranging from the crude ("Hand Count, Hand Job") to the celestial ("God has the last true vote"). Clad in shorts, sneakers and stetsons the Bushies stage a daily stand-off with the Goreites, both shouting in each other's faces, not listening to a word. Last week the only moment of peace came when a protester brought out his acoustic guitar and, 1960s style, urged everyone to "Pray for our nation/That God will heal our land."  Healing does seem to be what's required just now, when polls show the country divided even over whether it's divided. A CBS survey found 46% reckoning the current indecision was hurting the country, with 54% disagreeing. The punditocracy, however, is as one that whoever finally emerges from this thicket of law and partisan bickering, Gore or Bush, will be a hugely tainted figure.  Democrats may be just about able to accept a President W. If all recounted ballots are included and Bush is still the clear winner, Gore would be forced by the logic of his own argument - that the manual counts should be decisive - to accept the result and concede defeat. But nothing in the Bushies' rhetoric allows for a similar climbdown. They have trashed the manual counting process as inherently unfair and corrupt; they have traduced the reputation of most of the officials doing the counting. The Republicans have nowhere to go, no way of bowing out gracefully.  Instead, there would be a fierce legitimacy war for the next four years - as Republicans flatly refused to accept a Gore presidency. The Republican whip in the House has already talked of a move to reject Florida's 25 votes in the electoral college, should they eventually be certified for Gore. Even the usually moderate 1996 Republican nominee, Bob Dole, has suggested a boycott of the January 20 inauguration if their boy, George the Younger, is not on the podium. That would be serious business: inauguration is traditionally the time when America casts a constitutional spell, magically transforming what was once a mere party candidate into the head of state, head of government and leader of the nation. If Republicans boycott the event, the magic won't work.  Add to that a Senate which could be split 50-50 between the two parties and a wafer-thin Republican majority in the House, and you have all the elements of the traditional Thanksgiving formula: a family divided.  For all that, America could also remember the original idea behind tomorrow's festival - and give thanks. Despite everything, there is much to be grateful for. Take the zoo in Palm Beach County. Once you've got past the megaphones and banners, and inside the windowless, reinforced bunker (built for emergency coordination during a natural disaster) you find a picture of civic solemnity so impressive it's almost moving. In hushed silence more akin to an operating theatre, county employees and volunteers sit in groups of four (two counters and two observers from each party) inspecting every single ballot paper. They move cautiously, even reverently, awed by the task that fate has handed them: weighing the votes that could decide the presidency.  Or take a close look at that Florida Supreme Court hearing on Monday. A diverse bench - including two women and two African-Americans - sat in full view of the television cameras, practising open and intelligent justice. Whatever their decision, that session was an advertisement for the US system of constitutional law.  Or ponder the fact that America still does not know the name of its next leader, yet there are no riots on the streets, no tanks, and only 12% tell pollsters the current situation deserves to be labelled a "crisis". Indeed, America's numerical split in votes cast is belied by a deep national contentment about everything else: the indices of optimism and economic confidence have never been higher. "No one's freaking out," says one Gore aide, "people feel just fine."  So Americans gather tomorrow just like any other family: ready for rows and fights over the dinner table, but with equally good reason to mark the day as they were meant to - by giving cautious thanks.