They have a slogan here about "government in the sunshine" - and the funny thing is, they mean it. Early yesterday morning, the two women and one man who make up Palm Beach county's election-supervising body met to decide whether to recount their region's votes by hand. They did not gather behind closed doors, away from view. In fact they didn't meet behind doors of any kind: they held their session outside, on a makeshift platform, in front of the cameras and the crowds. This was not a press conference, but an actual discussion by three election commissioners. It took place right there, in the open: government in the sunshine. That little scene is typical of the mess America is in, one week after it was meant to have chosen a new president. To the naked eye, the Palm Beach session looked palpably absurd: a decision which could determine the next leader of the free world taken by a trio of amateurs, in barbecue conditions. Yet underneath that shambolic surface was a noble intent: truly open government. The same is true of so much of what has gone wrong here. The dizzying, chaotic torrent of rulings and reversals that came from a clutch of courts and commissions yesterday left most Americans bewildered, with the US media struggling to understand, let alone explain, them. It looked ridiculous.  In almost every case, judgments were challenged because the decision-makers were accused of being biased or partisan: Florida's chief election official is a Republican, while the state's attorney-general is a Democrat - and both gave opposite advice on the legality of the hand count. On Monday a federal judge ruled in favour of the Al Gore camp, and was instantly condemned because he had been appointed to the bench by Bill Clinton. Yesterday no fewer than five judges in Palm Beach county stepped aside, one after the other, because they feared they would be seen as partial. The whole thing looks nuts.  But look closer. The reason why none of these officials was deemed neutral was that they were all either elected or appointed democratically. If they had simply emerged, accountable to no one - like our own judiciary or quangocracy - the problem would not have arisen. But Americans prefer democracy. The same spirit lies behind that laughably complex "butterfly" ballot paper in Palm Beach county. It came about thanks to America's faith in true devolution, allow ing every region to do things, including ballot design, for themselves. As with that early-morning display of sunshine government, in America what looks like farce often conceals an admirable pursuit of democracy.  It's worth remembering all this, as Britons join the rest of the world in a warm bath of smugness, jeering at the American behemoth for stumbling so clumsily. We should recall how we would cope if one of our elections ended up in a similar dead-heat. A hung parliament would be resolved by that titan of modern, streamlined democracy, Her Majesty the Queen: she would break the tie by inviting one party leader to form a government. And if there was a dispute over voting irregularities, who would resolve that? Would elected officials come before us to debate, before the cameras, under a cloudy Westminster sky? Or would a quango suddenly appear, some body of great and good which none of us had ever elected, never heard of and never seen?  So we should pause before feeling too smug: much of America's current trouble comes from having too much democracy, not too little. Not that that makes it any easier for Americans to bear. They know they should follow the legal, democratic procedure - they've heard the ever-schoolmarmish Gore praise the last seven days as a national civics lesson - but they'd still like it over with. For once, George W Bush has come up with the perfect metaphor. Not with any words he has used - that really would be news -but rather with his face. Since the weekend it has been marked by a large blemish, hidden under a plaster. Americans see that and have a collective impulse: it's time to lance the boil.   Finality is the word of the hour - election 2000's equivalent of "closure" during the impeachment farrago of 1998. The assumption is that finality will come when a president-elect is at last in place - even if that takes till noon on January 20, when one of these two men will raise his right hand and swear the oath of office.  But is that right? Or might the radiation from this blast keep poisoning the atmosphere, contaminating the next presidency from now until 2004?  The precedents are not encouraging. When Rutherford B Hayes won the presidency after failing to win the popular vote in 1876, he was mocked as "His Fraudulency". That fate could await W if he scrapes home in Florida but stays behind in the total national vote. People will always wonder what strings Florida's governor, Jeb Bush, pulled to deliver for his brother. The conspiracy theories are already circulating. One placard-holder at a Jesse Jackson protest rally on Monday night urged me to remember Bush Snr's former job - as director of the CIA.  Gore's prospects are equally bleak. He knows the American right never   regarded Clinton as a fully legitimate president - and he won two clear mandates. Imagine what they would do with a court-imposed President Gore.  Whoever he is, the next president will take office under a dark cloud. A Gallup poll yesterday found that about a third of both Bush and Gore supporters would not accept the other as legitimate, even if he is declared the winner. Add to that a House and Senate all but split 50-50 and you see a Washington divided as it has not been since the aftermath of the civil war.  The optimists wonder if this might lead to balance and cross-party cooperation, essential if either side is to get anything done. Something like that may come, but not from any spirit of bipartisanship. Rather there will be a vast scaling back of ambition. Gore's biggest programmes, on prescription drugs for the elderly for example, are bound to be   dropped, one close aide told me yesterday. Bush's trillion-dollar tax cut is already history. Both men would have to appoint leading figures from the other side, creating a virtual government of national unity: we may not know who is going to be president, but Colin Powell is surely a cert for secretary of state under either man.  On policy, it will be a case of little by little. Gore would push more slowly than planned to give all American children healthcare coverage. Bush would hesitate before naming any ultra- conservative judges to the supreme court. For the next president will face a task much larger than any agenda of his own: he will have to win the acceptance of a suspicious electorate and heal a divided nation. The longer this race goes on, the smaller the prize becomes.