You can hardly blame them. The Cubans and Russians, Italians and Africans have listened for so long to Americans lecturing them on democracy, it's no wonder they are revelling in the chance to get their own back. Imagine the pleasure of the headline writer at Granma, Havana's national daily, as he branded the US "a banana republic". Think of the delicious shudder of  schadenfreude that ran down the spine of Robert Mugabe's official spokesman, as he helpfully suggested Zimbabwe dispatch a team of observers to help Americans manage their democracy. At long last they, along with the Chinese and Iraqis, can have a good laugh at the great American know-it-all, slipping up so spectacularly. It's slightly unfair, all this gloating, but inevitable: a superpower which cannot organise an election without waiting days (or weeks) for a result deserves to be teased. But America is suffering from an outcome that could, theoretically, happen to any democracy: a tie. Britain has had hung parliaments before; we've also had seats won by margins of just one or two votes (the 1997 majority in Winchester was two). What the US is enduring now is both possibilities - at the same time. As one Florida election official put it this week, "Democracy is not always neat and simple. If you want simple, head 70 miles south of here to Cuba - their elections are always very simple and very clear."  So America has not been exposed as a banana republic this week. If that were true, Jeb Bush would have done a better job of rigging the Florida contest for his brother - or Bill Clinton would have declared a state of emergency and made himself president-for-life (I bet the thought has crossed his mind). Instead   the country has a functioning government, with Clinton in place for three more months and a procedure to follow. It will take time, but the system is not about to collapse.  That said, the surreal twists and turns from Palm Beach county and beyond have exposed a deep flaw in the US. Not that the country is fundamentally corrupt - cock-up rather than conspiracy seems to explain most of the voting irregularities - but that America is crippled by a nostalgic, unjustified attachment to mechanisms which are long past their sell-by date.  The most screamingly obvious example is the electoral college, the phantom body which stands between voters and the final outcome. If it was just a matter of winning the most votes in the country, Al Gore would be president-elect by now, albeit by the narrowest of edges. Instead, the candidates have to put together a jigsaw puzzle of states, bagging their votes in the electoral college.  That idea is not all bad in itself: indeed, it prevents candidates lavishing all their attention on heavily populated areas like New York and California, forcing them instead to listen to the smaller states. In a federal country, that's essential. No, the problem is not with the electoral college itself so much as the way it operates.  The reason why Gore and George W Bush are locked in a death match in Florida is that only one of them can win the state's 25 electoral college votes: it's winner-takes-all. What's to stop Florida giving 12 votes to one candidate, 13 to the other? Nothing. Florida could do it, just as Maine and Nebraska already do. If the other 47 states went the same way, allocating their votes proportionally, the electoral college vote would reflect the popular one - and still give clout to the   smaller states. Yet Americans would tremble before taking that simple step.  Or consider the now notorious ballot paper in Florida's Palm Beach County, the one that required laser-beam eyesight and a knack for logic puzzles. Why did that county have that weird ballot paper? How come they're not all the same, if not across America then at least in Florida? The answer is that same, conservative attachment to the old way of doing things.  Americans are militant about preserving the rights of individual states to resist the standardising instincts of the centre - just as they were when they built the country 224 years ago and fought a civil war a century later. They are still radical devolutionists, who believe each area should always be able to go its own way: even if that means Palm Beach county having its very own ballot paper.   There is a pattern here. Rules devised for a very different era - the late 18th century - are obeyed to this day as if they were religious edicts. The electoral college grew out of an 18th-century fear of the undiluted popular will, preferring the deliberations of wise men to the instincts of the masses - yet today's 21st-century Americans fear altering it even by one jot. The principle of states' rights was a reaction against the centralising rule of George III - yet modern America clings to that principle two centuries after the British have gone, even when it leads to a patchwork of wildly different voting systems and electoral chaos.  It's an odd trait for Americans, who we usually imagine as a people unshackled by history, the creators of a new world. Yet this nostalgic fear of change is very real. While Britain redesigns its bank notes every few years, the US dollar   bill looks the same now as it always has. The same goes for the layout of America's leading newspapers: short of centuries of history, they cling to what they have.  Politically this habit makes a big difference. For it chains Americans to a system that can be patently anachronistic. Writer Daniel Lazare has argued that America is "the frozen republic", paralysed by a constitution that is absurdly out of date. But one does not have to go that far. For the beauty of the constitution is that it contains within it the possibility of its own reform. It can be amended. Not on a whim, admittedly, but amended all the same. So when Americans wanted to ban alcohol, as they did in 1919, they could pass the 18th amendment. And when they wanted to unban it, as they did in 1933, they could pass the 21st. Americans are not paralysed by the constitution - only by their own fear of changing it.  So they could modernise the electoral college or standardise voting (perhaps using computer software) if they wanted to. While they're at it, they could learn a few things from Britain - demanding, for example, that all postal ballots are in by election day and all votes counted before a result is declared. A simple idea that, but it does seem to work. They might also look at free TV advertising, like our party election broadcasts, removing the pressure to raise so much campaign cash.  There is much America can learn from democracies around the world. But first it has to realise that, though the founding principles of the republic remain inspiring, not every cog and wheel of that 18th-century machinery is sacred. America needs to recall its revolutionary origins, to remember that it was built on change - and that it can change now.