That's the thing about America: it never lets you down. As if directed by a divine script- writer, whose life's work is to produce a thriller with impossible twists and implausible turns, the US remains the story to beat all stories. Now, it has surpassed itself. As if an impeachment saga - centring on a girl, a dress and the leader of the free world - were not drama enough, the country has produced a cliffhanger to keep the entire planet on edge. If waiting for the OJ Simpson verdict made you tense, get a load of this year's presidential election.  This, you will recall, was the contest billed as a snoozathon between two dull second-raters. The campaign may have been that way, but the boys more than made up for it on the night. In this story's first twist, they produced what America had not witnessed for 40 years: an election whose outcome was still in doubt when voters woke up the next day.  But Al Gore and George W Bush have gone one better. They have fought an election which remains in play this morning, two days after polling - and which could stay that way for much longer. In the process they have sent a tremor through the American republic which could not only alter the outcome of this election, but touch off a constitutional earthquake - even a constitutional crisis.  Ground zero is Florida, which has a put a parish council-style margin between these two candidates. A recount in the state, with a result due today, should settle it: whoever wins Florida will win the White House. But, this being America, it's not that simple.  Beyond the recount, there are teams of lawyers crawling all over the state ready to contest the result even once the votes have been totted up. There are allegations of suspicious cock-ups - like the hundreds of Jewish pensioners outside Miami who thought they were casting a vote for Gore and his orthodox Jewish running mate, Joseph Lieberman, but plumped inadvertently for a man they loathe, the ultra-right xenophobe Pat Buchanan. How did that happen? And is it only coincidence that the governor of the state, charged with keeping an eye on the electoral machinery, happens to be Bush's brother?  Florida alone could keep the Washington lawyers busy for months: they could find legal challenges to every pencil mark on every ballot paper. But this is America: the suspense won't end there.  Let's say Bush scrapes a narrow victory in Florida. Is it over then? Well, maybe. Technically Bush would be safe, with Florida the last piece in his jigsaw puzzle: that would leave him with a razor-thin majority in the electoral college. But look at the other figure: the actual number of votes cast. There Gore is in front, by around 250,000 votes.  Suddenly a new question arises, one that has not been asked for 125 years (the last time the electoral college and popular vote did not match). Bush would have a legal mandate to be president - but would he have a moral one? Can a democracy really allow the winner to have fewer votes than the loser?  Of course, that outcome is not unheard of in Britain: the Tory victory of 1951 and Labour's in February 1974 both came without first place in the popular vote. But our system is different; our elections are parliamentary, not direct. Americans   expect to pick their leaders in a simple, straightforward fashion: the guy with the most votes should win.  A victory for George W Bush would represent a violation of that principle. Of course, he'll insist that both sides knew the rules before they started and, under those rules, he is the winner. But Americans may take a different view. One longtime Democratic consultant says that people "will go apeshit" if they think their will is being so blatantly ignored.  What could outraged American opinion do? One approach would be a drumbeat of media pressure on Bush to concede the election to Gore - to recognise that although the creaky electoral college may have given him a legal victory, his presidency would be illegitimate if he hadn't won the most votes.  Somehow that seems unlikely. The partisan rancour between Republicans and Democrats is so deep that the prospect of a gentlemanly "no, after you" from Bush to Gore is not even plausible. Factor in the grudge between the Bush clan and the Clinton crowd - with the former determined to avenge the latter's 1992 victory - and an outbreak of croquet-style sportsmanship is in the "not gonna happen" category.  More likely is that the two party machines start grinding, with Democrats putting the squeeze on the 538 human beings who actually make up the electoral college. In the past, no one ever paid attention to these characters, local worthies nominated for a role that was purely ceremonial. But in a race this tight, all the usual bets are off. Democrats could start pressing electors to defect - to go to the formal meetings in their state capitals on December 18, and instead of voting for Bush - as those from Bush states are obliged to do - to heed the popular will and back Gore.   A useful starting point might be the delegation of 11 electors from Gore's own state of Tennessee, 11 people who are mandated to vote for Bush. Couldn't at least one of them be persuaded to break ranks and see democratic reason? Electors have gone their own way before: one Gerald Ford delegate switched his vote in the electoral college of 1976. That time it didn't matter. But now there are only two electoral votes in it. If just one of those 538 delegates swapped, election 2000 would become a tie. If two made the move, Gore would be picking out carpets for the White House.  What the current paralysis may do is force Americans to take notice at last of the fictitious, archaic body they have barely looked at for more than a century. That debate, on the phantom college which chooses their leaders, was already under way yesterday morning. Over the next few weeks it may become a matter of urgency.  And there's another warning contained in this non-result result. The last time the US electorate was so torn was in 1960, when John F Kennedy and Richard Nixon were separated by a whisker of little more than 100,000 votes. That split-decision came at the end of a long period of contentment and prosperity, and presaged a painfully divisive decade. Will the Gore-Bush deadlock foretell an era of similar strife? Not even the most detailed exit poll will tell us the answer.