What's at stake in this election? More than you think. Despite the near-universal perception of next week's US presidential race as a beauty contest - "It's a choice between a moron and a prick," says one Gore aide - much more hangs on Tuesday's decision than who gets to smile for the cameras on Wednesday. The reverberations from this battle will pulse through America for the next four years. And not just America. Britain, and especially the Labour party, will feel the impact of this squeaker of a race. The US electorate should have no doubt as to what hangs on their decision. But, such are the talents of George W Bush and Al Gore, the voters still seem far from clear. For many, the two candidates are barely distinguishable on the issues - hence the emphasis on personality. That's a tribute to Bush's strategy of "hugging" Gore on policy - allowing the Democrat no real advantage on education or healthcare, for example- and a testament to Gore's timidity. The vice president has not dared mention the real differences between him and W, for fear of alienating the undecideds who will determine this contest.  So he rarely utters a word about abortion rights, one of the few areas where the next president will be decisive. Whoever wins will appoint perhaps three or four new judges to the nine-member Supreme Court, replacing those due to retire. The current bench supports the 1973 Roe v Wade decision guaranteeing a woman's right to choose - but only by a knife-edge margin of five to four. Bush would appoint conservative, anti- abortion judges and, within a couple of years, the United States would become a land where no pregnancy can be legally terminated. Gore would uphold the 1973 right. Tuesday's poll is a referendum on abortion - but it suits neither candidate to say so. Bush does not want to alienate suburban women who support choice, and Gore is panicky about rural conservatives who oppose it. But ignore the silence: this election matters.  Or reflect on one of the fatal flaws of American society: its love affair with the gun. In America 10 children or teenagers die from firearms every day, with 30,000 people of all ages killed a year. A Gore administration might propose an owners' registration system or a child-proof mechanism on the trigger (like those on any bottle of pills). But expect no action from President W. In Texas he approved legislation allowing people to carry a concealed   weapon anywhere - including into a church or synagogue. One activist for the National Rifle Association, the gun lobby headed by Charlton Heston, has bragged that if W wins "the NRA will have an office in the White House". The candidates don't want to talk about it: Gore is anxious not to scare off gun owners in must-win states such as Pennsylvania or West Virginia. But the division is there.  On the terrain where the candidates are most up-front the choice is just as plain. Voters can go for Bush's plan to blow the current surplus bonanza on a mix of spending programmes and a juicy tax cut, or they can plump for Gore who offers no such tax reduction. An independent forecast says the Bush scheme would see the surplus swallowed up by 2012, plunging America back into deficit. Interest rates would head back up and the good times would be over. That's the choice.  There's also a subtler decision to be made on Tuesday. For there is more to the presidency than making laws: it's also a social, even a cultural job.  A president is not a prime minister. Head of government is only one of his duties; he also has to serve as leader of the American tribe and virtual father to the nation. Only this explains the reverence shown to past presidents, the enshrining of their papers in well-funded libraries, the enduring interest in the lives of a Kennedy or Roosevelt.  This role, easily overlooked, is also on the line next week. Whoever wins will set the cultural tone for the nation. Just think of Bill Clinton's impact: future generations will see his as the iconic face of the 1990s, representing not just politics, but the entire spirit of the times.  This is the role scholar Fred Greenstein, in a new book, The Presidential Difference, calls "preaching and teaching". It is central to the office. If Gore takes the nation's "bully pulpit" his sermons would be dull, but they would at least address the big questions of the present and future, from the internet to the environment.  But what if Bush becomes America's high preacher? What mood would his presence create? The Dubya era would probably feel like the moment when the US decided to shy away from the future, to retreat into comfortable simplicities personified by a man who revelled in his lack of sophistication. It would herald America's stepping back from the scariness of the 21st century, opting instead for the plaid-shirt cosiness of a high-born Forrest Gump.  We would get caught up in that undertow, too, just as we have lived through the Clinton era. But we would also feel a more direct effect, most immediately on foreign policy. A Bush White House would be keen to turn away from Europe, to distance itself from Clinton's efforts in the Balkans and Northern Ireland and to focus instead on Latin America.  A secondary impact will be on the modern brand of special relationship, the one that's really mattered this last decade: the bond not so much between Britain and the US, as between Labour and the Democrats. If Gore loses, the Clinton-Blair partnership in power will be broken: one half of the transatlantic couple would suddenly be in the cold.  Besides the PR blow - and the inevitable perception that the global centre-left's glory days are over and that low-tax, small-government conservatism is back - there would be a more substantive problem. Labour has borrowed much from its Clintonian cousins, whether Jack Straw's teenage curfews or Gordon Brown's working families tax credit. That transfer was easy when the American ideas were coated in the shiny gloss of electoral success. But why adopt them when they're tainted with failure? How easy would it be for Brown, an enthusiast for the American system, to persuade the Labour party to look west if the US becomes Bush country once more?   The response is already being prepared. One of the human linchpins to the Labour-Democrat relationship told me yesterday that the modernisers, both here and in America, will simply argue that Gore's defeat came because "he went too far to the left, he became too associated with 'big government'." The lesson New Labour wants to learn from Gore's struggle is that, "you have to hold the centre".  But these are arguments Labour would rather not have to make. It would like Tuesday to bring the vindication of a fresh mandate for the progressive project. Americans need not busy themselves with such concerns next week; they have motives of their own for voting. For, despite appearances, much is at stake.