This war is far from over; indeed, it may have only just begun. The peacemakers and diplomats are piling into Israel - Robin Cook arrives today - talking of calm. But the stone-throwing and shooting has not stopped. Yesterday another Palestinian boy, this time a nine-year-old, took a bullet in the head. Dread and panic still stalk the promised land. The blame game rages on. For Palestinians, and much of world opinion, the culprit is clear: Likud leader Ariel Sharon started the trouble by swaggering onto that contested patch of holy Jerusalem turf revered by Jews as the Temple Mount and by Muslims as the site of the Al-Aqsa mosque. Sharon's crime has been compounded by an Israeli military which has used jeeps, tanks and even helicopters to rain down rubber bullets and worse on prepubescent boys armed with nothing more than rocks and slingshots.  Most Israelis see it differently. The left admits that Sharon lit that fateful first spark and that the Israeli army has since used excessive force. But that leaves plenty of blame left to go round. They point the finger at Yasser Arafat and his Palestinian Authority. He has 40,000 policeman at his disposal, a quasi-army which could have quelled the Al-Aqsa uprising before it had even started. Arafat has crushed dissent among his own people before, he could have done it again. Nor, adds Israeli opinion, did Palestinian TV have to stoke the fires of rebellion by broadcasting archive pictures of the 1987-93 intifada: a kind of how-to guide to the new generation.  There is almost no common ground between these two views, as Kofi Annan and co are doubtless discovering. But if consensus is impossible on the causes of the current war, agreement may be more likely on what it has cost.  Everyone can see that more than a hundred people, mostly Palestinians, have lost their lives. They can agree, too, that the tentative trust that took seven years to build since the Oslo accords has evaporated, that both sides have returned to the hardline positions of more than a decade ago. Suddenly Israelis who had made a reluctant peace with the idea of an eventual Palestinian state are having second thoughts: that police force, they now fear, could soon be a full-fledged hostile army, on Israel's doorstep. For their part, Palestinians who had come to accept a two-state solution - one for them, one for the Israelis - are now back on a 1970s agenda, demanding Israel's destruction.  There are two deeper shifts, which   could well be felt for decades to come. The first is the well-documented inclusion of Arab citizens of Israel in the current rebellion. For 52 years, through five wars, the so-called Israeli Arabs kept their counsel, enduring often grotesque discrimination. They did not join the struggle of their cousins on the West Bank and Gaza; the intifada never spread inside Israel's borders. Their position was always ambiguous - members of the Palestinian people, yet citizens of a Jewish state - but they maintained it. Not now. The 52-year balancing act is over: the Palestinians of Israel are in revolt, too.  The second, related shift is even more troubling. When Arafat and Israel's Ehud Barak met at Camp David in July they sat as two neighbours engaged in a land dispute, secular politicians tussling over borders and maps. Now the battle is no longer about real estate, but theology. The dispute over Jerusalem has turned a national conflict into a religious war - Jew against Muslim. Such a conflict does not recognise the "green line" that separates Israel proper from its occupied territories; it engulfs the Arabs of Haifa as well as Hebron. What's worse, it takes the Israel-Palestine conflict into a realm impervious to the secular, rational solutions of modern diplomacy: we have entered the realm of jihad.  This spells doom for both sides. Barak's position has been rendered all but untenable. He was elected last year on a promise to make peace; he went further than any Israeli ever before to achieve that goal - and now he has been made to look a fool. He withdrew from Lebanon, agreeing an unofficial accord with Hezbollah, only for that group to kidnap three Israeli soldiers. He discussed with Arafat a deal that would have seen further Jewish holy sites placed under the protection of the Palestinian authority: after Joseph's Tomb in Nablus was sacked on Saturday - with Palestinians tearing the pages from Jewish prayer books - few Israelis will allow Barak to sign such a pact now. They will demand that Jewish holy sites remain under Jewish protection.  Similarly, Barak was beginning to prepare Israelis to right a historic wrong: the dispossession of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees. Israelis were realising they would eventually have to open their doors and let those Palestinians return home. "Now it is clear it would be madness," wrote Ze'ev Schiff for the left-leaning Ha'aretz newspaper yesterday, "to add to [Israel's] Arab minority" after so many have "raised the banner of revolt." The last fortnight has convinced Israelis that the Arabs among them are a fifth column, and Barak cannot be seen to add to their ranks.  Not that this is good news for Arafat. He will not be able to ride this wave of Muslim anger forever: if there is a jihad in Palestine, his people will want Hamas, not a secularist like him, to lead it. More immediately, can he not see what this   confirmation of Israelis' worst fears will lead to? Does he not realise that the last two weeks have been the model election campaign for a new Likud government, headed by Sharon or a reborn Binyamin Netanyahu?  Which brings us back to the blame game. For perhaps the real culprits are those two would-be peacemakers, Barak and Arafat. Neither man realised that doves must be as tough as hawks - that in proposing compromise they must be as unbending as the rejectionists who would do nothing. Barak should have barred Sharon from his walkabout. He should have maintained his surveillance operation on the border with Lebanon. He needed to do all this not to be a warlord, but to be a peacemaker - to prevent the violence that would make his own people fear compromise.  The same applies to Arafat. He needed   to push aside Hamas and the other rejectionists and to prevent the sacking of Joseph's Tomb - if only to reassure the Israelis with whom he is seeking an accommodation. But he should also have quieted the holy war propaganda, which can only make his fellow Palestinians regard his dealings with the Israeli enemy as treachery. Instead he has fed the appetite for jihad, so that even his own achievement in Oslo is in peril.  There is a lesson here for peacemakers everywhere, including Northern Ireland. Those proposing compromise have to bend over backwards to provide security, to reassure their own side that peace is a risk they can afford to take. For if they slip up, their people will not easily agree to compromise next time: they won't be fooled again.