Trust Jesse Jackson to put his finger on it. The veteran civil rights leader and former presidential candidate always had a knack for the killer soundbite - and he seems to have passed it on to his son. For Jesse Jackson Jr, congressman from Illinois, identified the Democrats' key task as they gather in Los Angeles this week: "We've got to get Bill Clinton out of town as quickly as possible." Young Jesse was speaking literally - about the party managers' plan to bundle the president on the first available flight out of LA, taking Hillary and Chelsea with him. But Jackson's point went beyond mere travel arrangements. He was voicing the sentiment of all those working to get Al Gore elected in November: they want Clinton out of the spotlight and their man in it. Every minute the president spends hogging the bright glow of national adulation is another 60 seconds for Gore to kick his heels in the grey chill of the waiting room. When the two men finally met for a "torch-passing" event in Michigan late yesterday, the Gore staff could barely conceal their relief. Now, they hope, the focus will move away from the eight years of Clinton - and on to four for Gore.  But it won't be easy. Anyone watching the president's swansong address on Monday could see that. The camera panned across faces mesmerised by Clinton's sheer star power. Their eyes were wide open, rapt in attention; they bit their lower lips when he did, as if in solidarity. And when he gave them the slightest cue, they cheered and cheered.  There are not many politicians who could get away with as weird an entrance as Clinton dared. A camera showed him alone and without entourage, walking through the corridors and stairwells of the convention centre, before emerging through a tunnel and on to the stage: he looked like Russell Crowe in Gladiator. He may, as he told the Democratic devout, now come "with hair greyer and wrinkles deeper", but he is at the peak of his powers: it is hard to think of a more charismatic performer in any field, music or the arts or sport, anywhere in the world.  And yet, though only 54 years old this week, Bill Clinton will soon have to walk away from the job he so obviously loves. There is no logic to it: he wants to carry on doing it and the voters want to let him. Polls show consistently that if the constitution allowed it, Bill Clinton would walk a third term.  This is what Al Gore is up against. It is not that he's without assets: he is a fine   looking man with a sharp brain (tomorrow night he will break with political custom by delivering a speech he has written himself). And he has some star power of his own: he will be formally nominated by his old Harvard room-mate, the actor Tommy Lee Jones.  Gore even has some advantages denied to the big guy. He didn't dodge the draft, but volunteered to serve in Vietnam: hence tomorrow's "salute" to veterans of that war, a treat that was unavailable to Bill. His family life is blameless: if Monica had dropped by Al's desk to deliver pizza, she'd have got nothing more than a plea to recycle the box.  Yet somehow Gore adds up to less than the sum of these parts. His problem is an X-factor so nebulous and elusive, it seems cruel to punish him for lacking it: charisma. As Gail Collins wrote in yesterday's New York Times, while Clinton can make members of a large audience feel as though they're sitting in his living room after dinner, Gore "can make people sitting in his living room after dinner feel as if they're in a large audience, taking notes".  The result is the shadow. He is the younger brother overshadowed by a naughtier, sexier sibling; now he has to break free. That would be hard enough if it just meant enduring constant and unflattering comparison. But Gore has a trickier act to pull off. He somehow has to stay associated with the good bits of the Clinton record - unbroken economic prosperity - yet keep his distance from the personal sleaze that marred the Clinton years.   But here is the comforting news for Gore: he is not the only one in the shadow. He shares that problem with his opponent and indeed every politician on the American scene. They are all doing battle on ground shaped by the man they want to replace.  So George W Bush looks only slightly better than Gore when held up to the bright TV light of Clinton. The president's Monday performance will have erased much of the lustre left over from W's squinty-eyed attempt a fortnight ago. Besides, the Clinton factor hovers above the Bush candidacy in a more direct way: it makes it a grudge match. One White House official says Bush's motivation in seeking the presidency can be captured in a single word: Daddy. W wants to avenge Clinton's defeat of Bush Sr in 1992, a victory the American right have never quite accepted. That campaign was fought as a family feud - with Barbara Bush laying into Hillary - and this one already has a similar quality. Except the Bushes' enemy is not the Gores, it's the Clintons.  Still, the longest shadow cast by the man from Hope is on the substance of the 2000 contest. Clinton's great contribution to modern politics was what he called "triangulation" - recast by Tony Blair as modernisation and the third way. Clinton realised that Democrats would only win if they moved rightward   on welfare, crime and the deficit. That centrist, New Democrat ground is where Gore wants to fight now.  But Clinton's logic did not only apply to Democrats. George W realised the same was true of his own party: Republicans, too, had to move to the centre on issues where they had previously been deemed extreme. For them, that meant pensions, healthcare for the elderly, education and, most visibly, social diversity. Clinton had repeatedly beaten Republicans by casting them as right-wing and out of touch on those questions; Bush aims to defeat that charge with his centrist brand of "compassionate conservatism". The result was the Republicans' Cotton Club convention - lots of blacks on the stage, none in the audience - and Bush's leftward shift, promising new spending on the elderly's pensions and prescriptions. As one Democrat boss told the LA convention this week: "The Republicans pretended they were tolerant, pretended they were moderates. . . Let's face it, they pretended they were Democrats."  This is the real Clinton legacy. He has defined the ground where elections are won, and it's in his image. It says you have to be tough on welfare, defence and crime but tender on race, education and the environment. Both Democrats and Republicans failed when they were one and not the other. The result is a stampede from both sides towards the centre, with each party trying to be like the other and a blur where the old battle lines used to be - leaving personality as the decisive factor. That worked perfectly for Mr Personality himself, of course. But it hardly suits Gore. All he can do is hope that tomorrow America sees on his shoulders a light sprinkling of Clinton's magic stardust - as if fallen from the king on to his less golden heir.