Horror again and the west is to blame. It turned a blind eye to the Indonesian invasion of East Timor and the massacres that followed. Year after year, the United Nations passed indignant resolutions condemning Indonesia, but as East Timor blood flowed, the west poured in arms and investments to a corrupt dictatorship. So, what's new? What's new is Kosovo. It brought the glimmer of a new world order which increasingly demands that "something must be done", wherever, whenever. Ribald mockery at the idea still comes from the old diplomats murmuring about real-politik and the old left who have been the only ones protesting for years about East Timor, asking contemptuously where the "international community" has been until now? Not in Rwanda, Bosnia or Sudan.  What was admirable about the west's action in Kosovo was that there was no significant economic interest in Yugoslavia, beyond trying to stop bloodshed spreading. Nato's intervention was genuinely disinterested. But if East Timor is left to burn and die because the west does have very real interests in Indonesia, then in retrospect Kosovo will look shabby too. If the west only acts against penniless and friendless murderers, that is hardly the new moral foreign policy that Tony Blair promoted so eloquently in Chicago. The test now is whether the powerful world will take action where it could result in damage to its own interests.  As with the early days in Kosovo, the world's reaction to East Timor is painfully slow, while scores of decapitated heads sprout on spikes along the East Timor roadside. The absurdity of Jakarta solemnly announcing "martial law" in a province where it is the soldiers who are lawless only underlines the Indonesian government's incapacity or refusal to stop the killing. But the diplomatic dance continues. The United States, Britain, China, the Australians, everyone still says there will be no outside intervention without Indonesian permission. But what if Indonesia, in the difficult birth throes of democracy, says no? Or more likely, delays saying yes while the killing goes on for weeks?  First, the west must use its great armoury of threats and sanctions, which Robin Cook told the Japanese he was against. The IMF is paying out $43bn bailing out the crisis-ridden Indonesian economy: this week it issued a veiled threat to Jakarta. Under growing pressure to stop all aid and trade, the World Bank hinted yesterday they might respond. The Indonesian currency, the rupiah, took a sharp slide this week with shares tumbling: threats to cut off aid could destroy the fragile confidence of foreign investors. Pulling the plug on the Indonesian economy would be relatively easy, but it would be at high cost to all the rich nations so heavily invested there, causing another dangerous shudder in the global economy. To risk that on behalf of the human rights of this tiny half-island the size of Connecticut would be a sign that global priorities really are changing. Are they prepared to do it?  Fear of another cataclysmic crash may force the Indonesian government to let UN peace-keepers in. But what if economic warfare doesn't work and the killing goes on? Will the US, Britain, Australia and the rest send in troops against Indonesian wishes and thus without UN authority? Legally there is a much stronger case than in Kosovo, since East Timor has not been generally recognised as Indonesia's 27th province. Morally the case is the same as in Kosovo, the moral duty of any bystander to rescue a fellow citizen being attacked in the street. Will they do it? If nothing happens, or much too little too late, then forget the new world order. And forget the UN which will have been rendered helpless yet again.  This scene is going to be replayed over and over again in the next decades, as everywhere the urge to self-determination spreads. How well will the world cope? Slowly world politics are adjusting to the end of the cold war. No longer does every local conflict threaten the white knuckle terror of tipping us into eternity. We are free now to look at the rights and wrongs of each case, free to stand up for the oppressed. The UN charter acted as a cynical modus vivendi for the preventing of nuclear holocaust. Within their sphere of influence, powerful countries could torture minorities to their hearts' content, so long as they didn't cross those artificial borders which they had seized by military might. It suited the super-powers to control their great domains without legal question or interference from outside.  But the game has changed. In the emerging global order, borders don't matter but people do. Wherever people declare a desire for self-determination, there is new sympathy for them. The breath of freedom that knocked down the Berlin wall is now rolling over the old unnatural borders on the maps. In the past two centuries wars have been fought to build great blocks, undemocratically, regardless of what people wanted. But the next will be about fragmenting those blocks down to groups of people who choose to identify with one another democratically. It is the death knell for the old professional diploma tists' view that the break up of large units is always to be resisted.  Are we going to have yet more wars in a fruitless bid to hold back this global tide of separatism, or will we avoid such pointless bloodshed and let people choose? Now we need a new world order that recognises people's yearning for self-definition, however they choose to define themselves, however small the enclaves they wish to create. In a globalised economy it scarcely matters what size of democratic unit people choose to create. Money flows across borders and people will anyway be forced to trade closely with their neighbours. Old blocks may break down, but they will re-form as de facto federations, so long as this devolution happens with as little bitterness and bloodshed as possible.  Democracy is a missionary faith. It had to stifle its evangelising during the cold war but now it needs to stretch its wings more bravely on the world stage. Of course all this is in the future while China still stands in the way, solidly blocking any move within the UN that interferes with countries' internal affairs. But at least while China inches slowly towards a more open society, we should clear our own minds about the nature of universal freedom and what that must mean for the old nation states. The aspirations of Kashmiris and Kurds, Basques, Kosovans, East Timorese and countless more groups who want their freedom, deserve to be recognised.  That, of course, is what terrifies Indonesia, an extreme example of the fragile artificial nation with its thousands of fissiparous islands. But the world should consider whether it really wants to waste the next century trying to hold together those who wish to break apart, at what cost in money, arms and blood and according to laws laid down by what authority? Far better to let the people go.   News of East Timor is updated throughout the day on the Guardian network at