The real audit of the war in Kosovo is only just beginning. Military historians will pore over whether the air campaign won it, or was it the threat of ground troops? They may argue for years about how many Serb tanks were hit and how many bombs missed their targets altogether. But the final audit will not concern weaponry and tactics. In the end all that matters is what good was done and that depends on constructing a good peace. The G7 finance ministers met in Brussels yesterday to discuss the reconstruction of the Balkans. At the height of the air war there was grand talk of a Marshall Plan for the entire region. Neighbouring countries that suffered most from the sanctions and the war itself were kept sweet with promises that their way would be prepared for eventual EU entry.In the heat of war many gasped at the enormity of it, eyes rolled with incredulity. Albania? Romania? Really? But doubts were only whispered while those countries struggled with hundreds of thousands of refugees sweeping over their borders. Now here come those promises, fluttering home to roost with large bills in their beaks. They need money, they need it now, they need trade agreements, investments, compensation for all they've lost and will continue to lose, alongside help to modernise their institutions. Will the Nato countries who so honourably dashed to the rescue of Kosovo equally honourably hurry to fulfil their very expensive obligations to the peace? The jury is out. But the signs are not altogether propitious and the UN and aid agencies are looking on with anxiety. Why has it taken them so long to hold a meeting that only sketched out the vaguest of outlines, with no decision yet of how much is to be paid, when and by whom? An EU task force carrying out a survey on the ground of Kosovo's needs will not report until November. It is already regarded with some suspicion, since it keeps revising its estimates for reconstruction downwards. Oxfam and others are uneasy when they hear outgoing EU Monetary Affairs Commissioner, Yves-Thibault de Silguy emerge from yesterday's meeting saying blandly, "The current standard of living in Kosovo is higher than reflected in the available statistics and it seems the war damage is less than feared." Kosovo is poorer than Albania, with an annual GDP of $350 per head. The UN High Commission for Refugees is not optimistic. In tones of rising desperation they say that even the money already agreed long ago isn't there to buy the most basic material for people to rebuild their houses - tiles, wood, wiring and wood stoves. They point to the urgent need to set up civil society in the political vacuum that is rapidly being filled in each village by the wrong people, with no police force, courts or constituted authority - and no harvest for another year. "Every month that passes is a month nearer the winter." Never mind a Marshall Plan, the UNHCR has had only 41% of the money already long pledged for immediate emergency relief. The US has paid $28.5m, Norway has paid $10.8m, while Britain has paid the least at $800,000, (a bit less than the cost of one cruise missile). Britain has been critical of the UNHCR operation and says it has given $8m in kind instead. UNHCR is stung by the criticism since they only had a fraction of their promised funds, but it had its effect. As a result UNHCR has pulled staff and money away from equally needy but less high profile refugees in Sierra Leone and Tanzania. Watch out for similar swapping of resources. This week, Europe's council of finance ministers, estimating the Balkan bill at some $30bn, agreed that the Kosovo crisis will not cause the EU to breach its tight budget ceilings. The bill will be met from an existing pool. Where from? The money will come from other foreign aid spending. Which countries will lose out? Well, none specifically, officials say. The aid budget is always underspent anyway. Why? Some of the NGOs say acidly that the EU is always reluctant to spend it. Will this affect the big promise to relieve $50bn of third world debt? No, no, since much of that money is already long written off anyway and the rest will come from each country's own aid budget. So each country will cut money from other aid programmes to pay for it? They can if they want, it's up to them. As yet the rich west has not dug deep to pay for the world's poor - but it might, if pushed harder. What of the big Marshall Plan promise? Officials wriggle at the analogy and say it really isn't at all like Germany after the war when an astounding $88bn (at present day prices) rebuilt the country from nothing to super-prosperity within 10 years. It's all much more difficult, with no proper political or free market institutions in place. Will the EU, Nato, Japan and the rich world give enough to transform the fortunes of the Balkans? The sacrifice will involve not just money to the Balkans directly, but also opening up trade so they can sell the EU their cheap agricultural produce. That will demolish Portuguese and Greek agriculture: those farmers will protest. So will the rich parts of the EU pay out to compensate the poorest EU farmers in order to help the even poorer Balkans onto their feet? That is all still to be decided. Officials in Brussels can sound a little over-eager in discussing the problems about getting the right kind of aid to some of the more disastrous Balkan countries. They say only stable governments have the power to make painful decisions about closing down loss-making state industries and forcing through the changes needed for future investment. How do you get any unity in the Balkans when all the countries hate each other? Look at east Germany and consider how long it is taking to modernise despite huge sums of money. And $19.5bn has disappeared into Russia with nothing much to show for it. All this is true. But the question now is whether traditional despair over the Balkans becomes a useful excuse for the west to do less and less or whether it becomes a spur to try harder and do better than our catastrophic record in Russia. Peace, prosperity and democracy in the Balkans may not be easy to buy, but without large sums there's no chance. Good will abounds for now but will it still be cashable when the war is yesterday's news?Saving the Balkans can't all be done by clever accounting or by stealing from aid budgets for Angola and Eritrea. This was a just war: Nato countries took political risks to save others from ethnic slaughter and fighting it was expensive in cash, if not in Nato lives. But winning the peace needs to be expensive too for rich countries who can well afford it. Nothing dishonourable has happened yet but there are uneasy suspicions in the air that need to be dispelled with quick and generous action now. The EU did surprisingly well in the war: it must avoid turning disreputable in the peace.